                                         When Single-Agent with Skills Replace Multi-Agent Systems
                                                           and When They Fail
                                                                                          Xiaoxiao Li
arXiv:2601.04748v2 [cs.AI] 14 Jan 2026




                                                                      Trusted and Efficient AI (TEA) Lab
                                                       University of British Columbia | Vector Institute | CIFAR AI Chair
                                                                           xiaoxiao.li@ece.ubc.ca



                                                                                           Abstract
                                                  Multi-agent AI systems have proven effective for complex reasoning. These systems are
                                                  compounded by specialized agents, which collaborate through explicit communication, but
                                                  incur substantial computational overhead. A natural question arises: can we achieve similar
                                                  modularity benefits with a single agent that selects from a library of skills? We explore this
                                                  question by viewing skills as internalized agent behaviors. From this perspective, a multi-
                                                  agent system can be compiled into an equivalent single-agent system, trading inter-agent
                                                  communication for skill selection. Our preliminary experiments suggest this approach can
                                                  substantially reduce token usage and latency while maintaining competitive accuracy on
                                                  reasoning benchmarks. However, this efficiency raises a deeper question that has received
                                                  little attention: how does skill selection scale as libraries grow? Drawing on principles from
                                                  cognitive science, we propose that LLM skill selection exhibits bounded capacity analogous
                                                  to human decision-making. We investigate the scaling behavior of skill selection and observe
                                                  a striking pattern. Rather than degrading gradually, selection accuracy remains stable up to a
                                                  critical library size, then drops sharply, indicating a phase transition reminiscent of capacity
                                                  limits in human cognition. Furthermore, we find evidence that semantic confusability among
                                                  similar skills, rather than library size alone, plays a central role in this degradation. This
                                                  perspective suggests that hierarchical organization, which has long helped humans manage
                                                  complex choices, may similarly benefit AI systems. Our initial results with hierarchical
                                                  routing support this hypothesis. This work opens new questions about the fundamental
                                                  limits of semantic-based skill selection in LLMs and offers a cognitive-grounded framework
                                                  and practical guidelines for designing scalable skill-based agents.

                                                 “The capacity of the human mind for formulating and solving complex problems is very small
                                                  compared with the size of the problems whose solution is required for objectively rational
                                                  behavior in the real world.”
                                                                                                                           — Herbert A. Simon

                                         1   Introduction
                                         Large Language Models (LLMs) are increasingly deployed as general-purpose problem solvers that rely
                                         on modular decomposition to handle complex tasks. Recent progress has shown that multi-agent systems
                                         (MAS), where specialized agents collaborate via explicit communication, can substantially improve reasoning
                                         performance on challenging benchmarks [Xia et al., 2025, Wu et al., 2025, 2024, Chen et al., 2024, Guo et al.,


                                                                                                 1
               Multi-Agent System (MAS)                                               Single-Agent with Skills (SAS)




                                                                Paradigm Shift
                                                                                          Code      Fact   Calculation       …
                                                                                         review    checker

                                                                                                                         …

                                                                                                        Skill Library


      High Latency | High Token Usage | Redundant Context                      Low Latency | Efficient Tokens | Internalized Roles


                                          (a) From multi-agent systems to a single agent with skills.
           Small Skill Library                              Large, Flat Library                         Hierarchical Routing
              (Efficient)                                  (Cognitive Overload)                            (The Solution)




                                                                                  …
            Code     Fact   Calculation
           review   checker                            …

                                                                                                        Code                 Search
                                                                                                        Skills                Skills


                    Stage 1: High Efficiency Zone
                                                                                                  Hierarchical Solution


                                                             Stage 2: Cognitive Overload
                                                                        (Flat)




                                                 (b) Skill scaling law and its different stages.
Figure 1: Skill-based agents: efficiency gains and scaling limits. (a) Compiling multi-agent systems
into single-agent skill libraries reduces communication overhead, cutting latency and token usage. (b) Skill
selection accuracy degrades non-linearly as libraries grow, exhibiting a phase transition at a capacity threshold.
As skill libraries grow, the increased size and semantic confusability among skills drive this degradation;
hierarchical routing restores reliable selection by organizing skills into structured categories.



2024]. However, these systems incur significant computational overhead due to repeated context exchange,
multi-round coordination, and verbose natural language interactions [Chen et al., 2025, Yang et al., 2025, Yue
et al., 2025]. A natural question arises: can we retain the benefits of modular reasoning while reducing the
cost of explicit multi-agent coordination?
One promising direction is to replace distributed agent coordination with tool use—equipping a single LLM
with external APIs that it can invoke as needed [Schick et al., 2023, Qin et al., 2024b, Patil et al., 2024]. While
effective for atomic operations (calculators, search engines, code interpreters), tools typically lack the rich
behavioral specifications needed for complex reasoning subtasks. In this work, we investigate skills (recently
introduced by Anthropic [Anthropic, 2025a,b]) as a middle ground: a skill is a schema-bounded operation
characterized by a semantic descriptor, a well-defined input-output signature, and an execution policy that
specifies how to perform the operation. Unlike tools, which are automatically triggered, skills are chosen
based on the meaning and content of user requests, thus encapsulating not just what to do but how to reason,
making them suitable for internalizing the specialized roles that would otherwise require separate agents.


                                                                       2
Skills offer a compelling alternative to multi-agent coordination. Where an MAS instantiates specialized
reasoning as distributed roles communicating through natural language, a single-agent system with skills
(SAS) internalizes these roles as selectable actions within a unified context. This perspective suggests a
compilation view: a MAS can be transformed into an equivalent SAS by encoding each agent’s behavior as a
skill, eliminating inter-agent communication overhead while preserving functional capability.
We first demonstrate that this compilation is both faithful and efficient. On representative reasoning benchmarks
(GSM8K [Cobbe et al., 2021], HumanEval [Chen et al., 2021], HotpotQA [Yang et al., 2018]), skill-based
single-agent systems achieve similar accuracy of their multi-agent counterparts while reducing token consump-
tion by 54% and latency by 50% on average. These results establish skills as a practical alternative to explicit
agent decomposition (at least when skill libraries remain small).
However, expanding the skill repertoire introduces a fundamental challenge. As the number of available skills
grows, the model must select the appropriate action from an increasingly large and semantically overlapping
set. This raises a question that has received little systematic attention:

         How does the size of the skill library affect an LLM’s ability to select the correct skill?

To answer this question, we study the scaling behavior of skill selection in LLMs. Drawing on principles
from cognitive science, we hypothesize that skill selection exhibits capacity-limited scaling analogous to
human decision-making. Our experiments confirm this hypothesis. Across controlled skill libraries ranging
from 5 to 200 skills, we find that selection accuracy degrades non-linearly, following a phase transition pattern:
accuracy remains high when library size is below a critical threshold, then drops sharply beyond this capacity.
This degradation is also driven by semantic confusability among skills, rather than by library size alone. This
finding connects LLM behavior to similarity-based interference in human memory retrieval [Shepard, 1987,
Anderson, 1974]. We further show that hierarchical routing: decomposing skill selection into coarse-to-fine
decisions can effectively mitigate this degradation when flat selection fails when skill library scales up. This
mirrors findings from cognitive science on chunking [Chase and Simon, 1973] and menu design [Miller, 1981].

Contributions.     This work makes three contributions:
1. We demonstrate that skill-based systems can approximate multi-agent performance with significantly lower
   token usage and latency and formalize the compilation process.
2. We characterize the non-linear scaling limits of skill selection, identifying a capacity threshold and
   establishing that semantic confusability, not library size alone, drives degradation.
3. We show that hierarchical routing mitigates scaling limits, providing cognitive-grounded design principles
   for scalable skill-based agents.
Our findings bridge agent skills, multi-agent systems, tool use, and cognitive science, offering both theoretical
insights into LLM action selection and practical guidelines for building efficient, scalable agent systems.


2     Problem Formulation: Multi-Agent Systems to Single-Agent with Skills

To answer the question when “When Single-Agent with Skills Replace Multi-Agent Systems”, we formalize
the relationship between Multi-Agent Systems (MAS) and Single-Agent with Skills (SAS), establishing the
theoretical foundation for studying skill selection scaling. We try to use the simple definition as possible to
keep only the notations related to our analysis.

2.1   Multi-Agent Systems

Definition 2.1 (Agent). An agent is a tuple a = (ρ, ϕ), where:
• Role description (ρ): a semantic specification of the agent’s identity and expertise;
• Behavioral policy (ϕ): instructions governing the agent’s reasoning and response generation.
Definition 2.2 (Multi-Agent System). A multi-agent system is a tuple M = ⟨A, G, Π⟩, where:
• A = {a1 , . . . , an } is a set of agents;
• G = (A, E) is a communication graph specifying permissible mechannels;
• Π = (I NIT, ROUTE, T ERM) is a coordination protocol.


                                                        3
Algorithm 1 Multi-Agent System Execution
Require: Task x, Agent set A, Communication graph G, Protocol Π
 1: Initialize history h ← x
 2: Select initial agent a(0) ← Π.I NIT(A, x)
 3: t ← 0
 4: while not Π.T ERM(h) do
 5:    y (t) ← a(t) .E XECUTE(h) {Agent generates response}
 6:    h ← h ⊕ y (t) {Append to history}
 7:    a(t+1) ← Π.ROUTE(h, a(t) , G) {Route to next agent}
 8:    t←t+1
 9: end while
10: return h



The coordination cost of solving task x over T rounds is:
                                                    T
                                                    X
                                       CMAS (x) =         |y (t) | + T · csync ,                               (1)
                                                    t=1

where |y (t) | denotes messagelength and csync captures synchronization overhead per round.

2.2   Single-Agent with Skills (SAS)

We now define an alternative paradigm that internalizes multi-agent capabilities within a single model.
Definition 2.3 (Skill). A skill is a tuple s = (δ, π, ξ), where:
• Skill descriptor (δ): a semantic description used for skill selection;
• Execution policy (π): instructions specifying how to perform the skill;
• Execution backend (ξ ∈ T ∪ {∅}:) an external tool t ∈ T , or ∅ for internal execution (e.g., a prompt
  template).

This formulation admits a spectrum of implementations:
• Internalized skills (ξ = ∅): Execution occurs entirely within the model’s reasoning process via prompt-
  based invocation.
• Externalized skills (ξ = t): The model generates parameters for tool t, and execution is delegated externally.
Remark 2.1 (Separation of Selection and Execution). The decomposition into (δ, π, ξ) reflects a key insight:
skill selection depends primarily on the intent signature δ, while skill execution is governed by π and ξ. This
separation allows us to isolate selection complexity from execution variability, which is a distinction critical to
our scaling analysis.
Definition 2.4 (Single-Agent with Skills). A Single-Agent with Skills (SAS) is a tuple S = ⟨a, S, σ⟩, where:
• a is a base language model;
• S = {s1 , . . . , sk } is a skill library;
• σ : H × D → S is a skill selector mapping context and skill descriptors D = {δ1 , . . . , δk } to a skill.

Note that the selector σ operates over skill operations D, not full skill specifications. This reflects the
realistic constraint that selection decisions are based on semantic descriptors rather than complete procedural
knowledge.
The cost of single-agent using skills over T round is:
                                                ′
                                              T 
                                              X                                   
                                 CSAS (x) =         Cselect (σ, S) + Cexec (s(t) ) .                           (2)
                                              t=1

Remark 2.2. Comparing Algorithms 1 and 2, the key structural difference is clear: multi-agent systems
route between agents (Line 7 in Alg. 1), while skillful single agents select among skills (Line 4 in Alg. 2).
Compilation transforms the former into the latter.


                                                          4
Algorithm 2 Single-Agent with Skills Execution
Require: Task x, Skill library S, Selector σ
 1: Initialize history h ← x
 2: t ← 0
 3: while not T ERM(h) do
 4:    s(t) ← σ(h, D) {Select skill based on descriptors}
 5:    y (t) ← E XECUTE(s(t) , h) {Execute selected skill}
 6:    h ← h ⊕ y (t)
 7:    t←t+1
 8: end while
 9: return h


2.3     The Compilation Problem

We now formalize the transformation from MAS to SAS.
Definition 2.5 (Compilation). A compilation is a mapping Φ : M → S that transforms a multi-agent system
into a skillful single agent. Given M = ⟨A, G, Π⟩, the compilation produces S = ⟨a, SΦ , σΦ ⟩, where each
agent’s specialized function is distilled into one or more skills.

We formulate the transition from MAS to SAS as a Capability Compilation process. Our compiler Φ must
disentangle the high-level reasoning capabilities embedded in an agent’s persona from its execution mechanism.
We define the compilation function Φ : GMAS → S as a composite of three distinct operations: Decomposition,
Backend Assignment, and Topology Internalization. The MAS-to-SAS compliation algorithm is presented in
Algorithm 3 in the Appendix.

2.3.1    Phase 1: Capability Decomposition
For each agent ai ∈ A defined by its system prompt ρi , we first apply a decomposition function fdecomp to
extract a set of discrete atomic capabilities Ki :
                                       Ki = fdecomp (ρi ) = {κi,1 , κi,2 , . . . }                          (3)
Here, a capability κ represents a specific functional unit (e.g., “perform code review” or “fetch weather data”)
derived from the agent’s role description, independent of how it is implemented.

2.3.2    Phase 2: Backend Assignment
For each extracted capability κ, the compiler must determine its execution backend ξ. Corresponding to
internalized skills and externalized skills defined in Sec 2.2. we define the assignment function fbackend :
                                           
                                               t∈T      if κ requires external grounding (Externalized)
            s = (δ, π, ξ)   where    ξ=                                                                     (4)
                                               ∅        if κ is purely cognitive (Internalized)
Here, the skill descriptor δ is generated to semanticize κ for retrieval (e.g., Skill Name).

2.3.3    Phase 3: Topology Internalization
The topology internalization operator transforms the explicit communication edges in GMAS into implicit
input/output constraints within the skill definitions. Let Nout (ai ) = {aj | (ai , aj ) ∈ E} be the set of
downstream dependencies for agent ai .
We define the constraint injection function finject :
                                          πkfinal = finject (πkbase , Nout (ai ))                           (5)

Mathematically, this can be modeled as appending a constraint set C to the natural language policy:
                                                                             
                                                 [
                            πkfinal ← πkbase ⊕        Handover(ai → aj )                                  (6)
                                                     aj ∈Nout (ai )



                                                             5
where ⊕ denotes string concatenation or semantic fusion, and Handover(·) generates instructions ensuring the
output format of tool tk is compatible with the expected input of tools in agent aj .

2.3.4    Optimization Objective
The goal of the compilation is to produce a skill library S that minimizes the Cognitive Load L(S) while
maintaining functional equivalence to the original MAS:
                             min L(Φ(GMAS ))           s.t.     Perf(SAS) ≈ Perf(MAS)                        (7)
                               Φ

where L accounts for both the retrieval complexity (selection noise) and the context consumption of the
generated skills.
The final Single-Agent System is thus equipped with the compiled skill library:
                                             [ [ 
                                       S=               (tk , πkfinal )                                      (8)
                                                   ai ∈A tk ∈τi


2.4     Properties of MAS-to-SAS Compilation

Definition 2.6 (Behavioral Fidelity). A compilation Φ is behaviorally faithful if the output distributions are
preserved:
                                  ∀τ ∈ T : PM (y | τ ) = PΦ(M) (y | τ ).
Definition 2.7 (Cost Efficiency). A compilation Φ is cost-efficient if there exists a non-trivial subset T ′ ⊆ T
such that:
                                     ∀τ ∈ T ′ : CSAS (τ ) < CMAS (τ ).

The central trade-off is clear: compilation eliminates inter-agent communication but introduces a selection
bottleneck. Formally, the efficiency condition reduces to:
                                   X                      X
                                       Cselect (σ, |S|) <    Ccomm (G, Π) .                              (9)
                                       t                                t
                                   |          {z            }       |        {z         }
                                       selection overhead           communication overhead


3     Experiments on MAS-to-SAS Compilation
First, we identify the compilable and uncompilable MAS. Then, we present results on the feasibility of
compiling MAS to SAS, achieving similar performance at lower cost.

3.1     Conditions for Compilability

Not all multi-agent systems can be faithfully compiled into a single skillful agent. We characterize the
boundary.
Definition 3.1 (Compilability). A multi-agent system M is compilable if there exists a compilation Φ : M →
S satisfying:
                                 ∀x ∈ X : PM (y | x) = PΦ(M) (y | x).
Proposition 3.1 (Compilability Conditions). A multi-agent system is compilable if and only if:
C1. Serializable Communication: G admits a topological ordering—agent interactions can be sequenced
    without information loss.
C2. Shared History: Agent outputs depend only on shared history h, with no private state.
C3. Homogeneous Backbone: All agents use the same underlying model.
Conversely, compilation fails when agents require true parallelism (independent sampling), private information,
adversarial objectives, or heterogeneous capabilities.

Table 1 summarizes common multi-agent architectures and their compilability.
Remark 3.1 (Scope). This work focuses on compilable systems. We study when compilation is efficient—a
question orthogonal to when it is possible.


                                                                6
                          Table 1: Compilability of common multi-agent architectures.
                   Architecture             Structure                               Compilable
                   Pipeline                 a1 → a2 → · · · → an                          ✓
                   Router-Workers           Router → {Workers} → Aggregator               ✓
                   Iterative Refinement     Writer ↔ Critic (loop)                        ✓
                   Debate / Adversarial     Proponent ↔ Opponent                          ✗
                   Parallel Sampling        Independent agents, best-of-n                 ✗
                   Private Information      Agents with hidden state                      ✗


Table 2: Benchmark tasks, MAS architectures, and agent-to-skill mappings for compilation experiments. Each
MAS is compiled into an equivalent SAS that performs the same computation in a single LLM call.
  Benchmark         Architecture          MAS Agent      SAS Skill          Description                Calls
                                          Decomposer     decompose          Break problem into steps
  GSM8K             Pipeline              Solver         solve              Execute calculations       3→1
                                          Verifier       verify             Validate solution
                                          Coder          code               Generate implementation
  HumanEval         Iterative             Critic         critique           Review for bugs            3→1
                                          Refiner        refine             Fix identified issues
                                          Router         analyze            Plan information needs
                                          Retriever      retrieve           Extract relevant facts
  HotpotQA          Router-Workers                                                                     4→1
                                          Reasoner       reason             Chain logical steps
                                          Aggregator     synthesize         Produce final answer


3.2     Compilation Efficiency Experiments

Having established conditions under which multi-agent systems can be compiled into skillful single agents
(Proposition 3.1), we now empirically investigate whether such compilation is efficient, i.e., whether the
compiled SAS achieves comparable performance while reducing computational cost.

3.2.1    Experimental Setup
In both internalized and externalized skill cases, the selection of which skill to invoke remains an internal
cognitive decision. In this studying, we focus on purely internalized skills to isolate the cognitive cost of
action selection from external execution noise. We evaluate compilation efficiency on three benchmarks, each
matched to a compilable MAS architecture, including GSM8K [Cobbe et al., 2021] — grad school math with
problems, HumanEval [Chen et al., 2021] — a python code generation task, and HotpotQA [Yang et al., 2018]
— multi-hop question answering. Their corresponding MAS architectures, workflows and their mapping are
summarized in Table 2. The compiled SAS performs the equivalent computation in a single API call, with the
model internally managing skill invocation through structured output sections (e.g., [DECOMPOSE], [SOLVE],
[VERIFY]).
We evaluate using GPT-4o-mini as the backbone model for all agents and the compiled SAS, ensuring a fair
comparison under the homogeneous backbone condition (C3). We measure: Task Accuracy as correctness of
final output (exact match for GSM8K/HotpotQA, syntax validity for HumanEval); Total Tokens as the sum of
prompt and completion tokens across all API calls; Latency as the wall-clock time from task input to final
output; and API Calls as the number of separate LLM invocations.

3.2.2    Results
Table 3 presents the main results comparing MAS and compiled SAS across all benchmarks.
Faithful Compilation. The compiled SAS achieves accuracy within −2.0% to +4.0% of the original MAS
across all benchmarks, with an average improvement of +0.7%. This confirms that compilation is faithful in


                                                         7
Table 3: Performance and efficiency comparison between MAS and SAS after compilation. Token and latency
reductions are computed as (MAS − SAS)/MAS × 100%. Positive values indicate SAS is more efficient.
                Accuracy (%)    Avg. Tokens    Avg. Latency (ms)
    Task                                                            Acc. ∆    Token ↓   Latency ↓   API Calls
                MAS SAS         MAS SAS        MAS       SAS
    GSM8K        94.0    92.0   1407     616   10565       7537     −2.0%      56.2%      28.7%       3→1
    HumanEval   100.0   100.0   1400     749   7227        2970     0.0%       46.5%      58.9%       3→1
    HotpotQA     84.0    88.0   4359    1816   11671       4559     +4.0%      58.4%      60.9%       4→1
    Average       –       –       –       –       –         –       +0.7%     53.7%      49.5%          –




practice—the SAS preserves (and occasionally improves upon) MAS performance. Notably, on HotpotQA, the
SAS outperforms the MAS by 4.0%, likely because the unified context enables better information integration
across the retrieval and reasoning steps.
Token Efficiency. Compilation reduces token consumption by 53.7% on average, with the largest savings on
HotpotQA (58.4%) and GSM8K (56.2%). This reduction stems from eliminating redundant context repetition
across agent calls—the SAS shares a single context window rather than re-encoding the task description,
intermediate results, and instructions for each specialized agent. The effect is most pronounced for HotpotQA,
where the multi-hop reasoning pipeline originally required passing retrieved passages between agents multiple
times.
Latency Reduction. End-to-end latency decreases by 49.5% on average, with the most dramatic improvement
on HotpotQA (60.9%) and HumanEval (58.9%). The primary factor is the reduction from 3–4 sequential API
calls to a single call, eliminating inter-agent communication overhead and network round-trip delays. GSM8K
shows a smaller latency reduction (28.7%) despite significant token savings, suggesting that the mathematical
reasoning computation itself (rather than communication) dominates latency for this task.
API Call Reduction. API calls reduce from 3–4 calls (MAS) to exactly 1 call (SAS). This has direct cost
implications, as API pricing typically includes per-call overhead beyond token costs. For HotpotQA, the
reduction from 4 calls to 1 represents a 75% decrease in per-request API overhead.
These results demonstrate that MAS-to-SAS compilation has the potential benefits of modular multi-agent
architectures (reusable components) combined with the runtime efficiency of monolithic single-agent execution.
Practitioners can develop and debug agent pipelines using intuitive multi-agent abstractions, then compile to
SAS for production deployment without sacrificing accuracy.
The success of compilation rests on three factors: First, agent behaviors are successfully encoded as skills
through descriptive prompts. The model can follow structured skill invocation patterns (e.g., “First decompose,
then solve, finally verify”). Second, the sequential structure of agent interactions (C1) maps naturally to a
single autoregressive generation. The model maintains coherent state across “skill invocations” within its
context window. Third, there is no information loss under shared history (C2), as all information available to
MAS agents is equally available to the SAS. No private state is lost in compilation.
In this version, we have not explored in depth when complications fail to help, even under Proposition 3.1.
But we observe that compilation provides smaller benefits when tasks require very long outputs that approach
context limits.



4     The Skill Scaling Hypothesis: A Cognitive Science Perspective

The preceding results establish that MAS → SAS compilation is both possible and efficient for compilable
architectures. However, this raises a critical follow-up question: how does the compiled SAS scale as the
skill library grows?
Equation (9) reveals a critical dependency: the viability of compilation hinges on how selection cost scales
with the skill library size |S|. In the experiments above, each SAS operates with 3–4 skills—well below
problematic thresholds. When compiling larger multi-agent systems (e.g., with 10+ specialized agents), the
resulting skill library may trigger degradation in selection accuracy. This motivates our investigation into the
cognitive scaling of skill selection.


                                                       8
4.1   Cognitive Foundations

Our scaling hypothesis draws on established principles from cognitive psychology and decision science. Four
foundational theories are particularly relevant:

F1: Hick’s Law and Decision Complexity. Hick’s Law [Hick, 1952, Hyman, 1953] establishes that human
choice reaction time scales logarithmically with the number of alternatives: RT = a + b · log2 (n + 1), where
n is the number of equally probable options. This reflects a binary subdivision process in decision-making.
Critically, Longstreth [1988] demonstrated that this relationship breaks down beyond approximately 8 choices
(∼3 bits), becoming curvilinear as the subdivision strategy fails. We hypothesize that LLM skill selection
exhibits analogous capacity-limited behavior, with accuracy (rather than reaction time) as the dependent
measure.

F2: Cognitive Load Theory (Working Memory Capacity Limits). Miller’s seminal “magical number
seven” [Miller, 1956] identified fundamental limits on immediate memory span. Sweller [1988]’s and Sweller
et al. [2011]’s Cognitive Load Theory extend this to complex tasks, distinguishing intrinsic load (inherent
task complexity) from extraneous load (unnecessary processing demands). When total cognitive load exceeds
working memory capacity, performance degrades sharply—a threshold effect rather than gradual decline. We
interpret the skill library size |S| as imposing intrinsic load on the selection process, with a capacity threshold
κ analogous to working memory limits.

F3: Similarity-Based Interference. Shepard’s Universal Law of Generalization [Shepard, 1987] establishes
that confusion probability decays exponentially with psychological distance: g(d) = e−d/λ . Anderson’s
ACT-R model [Anderson, 1974, 1983, Anderson and Reder, 1999] provides a mechanistic account through the
fan effect: as more facts share a cue, associative strength to each fact decreases, so each receives less activation,
leading to slower retrieval and, in some tasks, reduced accuracy. The Generalized Context Model [Nosofsky,
1986] formalizes how classification errors increase with both option count and inter-option similarity. These
theories predict that semantically similar skills will interfere during selection, independent of total library size.

F4: Hierarchical Processing and Chunking. Chase & Simon’s chunking theory [Chase and Simon, 1973]
demonstrates that experts manage complexity through hierarchical organization—chess masters perceive board
positions as ∼7 chunks rather than 32 pieces. Menu design research [Miller, 1981, Lee and MacGregor, 1985]
finds optimal breadth of 4–8 items per level, matching working memory capacity. Tversky’s Elimination-by-
Aspects model [Tversky, 1972] formalizes how stepwise narrowing of options can make large choice sets
more manageable.

4.2   Problem Formulation

Problem 4.1 (Cognitive Scaling of Skill Selection). Let σ be a skill selector operating on a library S =
{s1 , . . . , sN }, where each skill si = (δi , πi , ξi ) comprises a semantic descriptor δ, an execution policy π, and
an execution backend ξ. Define the selection accuracy for a task distribution T as:
                                                                                   ∗
                                   ACC(σ, S) = Eτ ∼T 1 σ(τ, {δk }N
                                                                                   
                                                                          k=1 ) = sτ    ,
where s∗τ is the optimal skill. The scaling problem investigates the degradation of ACC as |S| → ∞, aiming to
decouple the cost of search space expansion from semantic interference.

Why Study Selection Accuracy? One might ask why we focus on skill selection accuracy rather than
end-task performance. Task accuracy conflates multiple failure sources: action selection, execution fidelity,
and external noise. Changes in selection reliability can be masked at the task level, particularly in error-tolerant
settings. In contrast, selection accuracy isolates the intrinsic difficulty of choosing the correct skill from an
expanding library. This upstream decision directly governs whether downstream execution is even invoked
correctly. While task accuracy answers whether a system works, selection accuracy reveals why it works—and
when it will fail.

4.3   The Scaling Law

Drawing on the cognitive foundations above, we hypothesize that selection accuracy follows a composite
decay law governed by two factors: (1) an effective capacity threshold κ, analogous to working memory limits,


                                                          9
and (2) semantic interference I(S) among skills:
                                                         α
                                    ACC(σ, S) ≈                 − ϵ · I(S),                                  (10)
                                                   1 + (|S|/κ)γ
where α ≤ 1 is asymptotic accuracy at small |S|, κ is the capacity threshold when accuracy drops to half,
γ > 1 controls the sharpness of the phase transition, and ϵ > 0 represents sensitivity to semantic interference.
This formulation has a clear cognitive interpretation:
• The first term captures Hick’s Law–style capacity limits. When |S| ≪ κ, accuracy remains near α;
  when |S| ≫ κ, accuracy decays as O(|S|−γ ). In our model, the exponent γ > 1 is chosen to capture a
  super-linear decline in performance once cognitive load exceeds capacity, consistent with cognitive load
  theory’s assumption of substantial performance degradation under overload [Sweller et al., 2011].
• The second term captures Shepard-style similarity interference. Even at fixed |S|, high semantic overlap
  among skills (large I(S)) degrades accuracy through the ACT-R fan effect—competing skills share retrieval
  cues, reducing discriminability.
The additive structure reflects that capacity limits and similarity interference are partially independent failure
modes: a small library of highly confusable skills can fail (high I, low |S|), as can a large library of distinct
skills (low I, high |S|).

4.4   Scaling Hypotheses

The formulation in Eq. (10) implies four testable predictions, each grounded in cognitive theory:
1. H1: Non-linear Phase Transition. Selection accuracy exhibits a critical regime governed by capacity
   threshold κ. The system maintains high accuracy when |S| < κ but suffers sharp, non-linear degradation
   once library size exceeds this threshold. This mirrors the breakdown of Hick’s Law [Longstreth, 1988] (F1)
   and the threshold effects in Cognitive Load Theory when working memory is exceeded [Sweller, 1988]
   (F2). The transition is phase-like rather than gradual: accuracy is relatively stable until |S| ≈ κ, then drops
   precipitously.
2. H2: Confusability-Driven Errors. Selection degradation is driven primarily by semantic confusability
   among skills, not mere library size. Adding semantically similar “competitor” skills degrades accuracy more
   than adding an equivalent number of distinct skills. This prediction follows directly from the interference
   term ϵ · I(S) in Eq. (10) and related to similarity-based interference in cognitive science [Shepard, 1987,
   Anderson, 1974, Nosofsky, 1986] (F3).
3. H3: Instructional Saturation. Skills encapsulate complex micro-policies π that may consume processing
   bandwidth. We test whether policy complexity affects selection accuracy, specifically, whether verbose
   policies reduce effective capacity κ by increasing extraneous cognitive load [Sweller, 1988] (F2).
4. H4: Mitigation via Hierarchy. When flat selection fails (|S| > κ), hierarchical organization can restore
   reliable scaling by ensuring each decision point involves |Slocal | < κ options. This transforms an intractable
   single decision into a sequence of tractable sub-decisions. As described above, chunking theory [Chase
   and Simon, 1973] and Elimination-by-Aspects model [Tversky, 1972] (F4) establish that hierarchical
   decomposition to coverts overwhelming choice sets to manageable decisions.
In the following sections, we empirically test each hypothesis.


5     Experiments for Scaling-law

We design a series of controlled experiments to empirically validate the three key predictions of our skill
scaling hypothesis: (1) the existence of a non-linear phase transition in selection accuracy, (2) the effect of
instructional complexity on effective capacity, (3) the impact of instructional saturation, and (4) the mitigation
potential of hierarchical routing.

5.1   Experimental Setup

Synthetic Skill Library Construction. To enable controlled experimentation with precise manipulation of
skill library properties, we construct synthetic skill libraries rather than relying on existing benchmarks. This
approach allows us to systematically vary library size |S| while controlling for confounding factors such as
semantic similarity distribution and policy complexity.


                                                         10
Our skill generation framework spans 8 domains: mathematics, coding, writing, analysis, translation, question-
answering, formatting, and extraction. Each domain contains 5 subtypes, yielding 40 distinct skill categories.
For each category, we define 5 skill templates with varying specificity, producing a pool of 200 unique skill
templates. Each skill si = (δi , πi , ξi ) is instantiated with:
• Skill descriptor δi : A natural language description following the pattern “[Skill Name]: [Capability
  Description]”, e.g., “Calculate Sum: Calculate the sum of the given numbers”.
• Execution policy πi : Execution instructions with controlled complexity (detailed below).
• Execution backend ξi : Set to ∅ (internalized) for all experiments unless otherwise specified.

Task Generation. For each skill library configuration, we generate evaluation tasks by sampling skills
uniformly and constructing queries that unambiguously map to the sampled skill. Tasks are generated using
domain-specific templates with randomized parameters (e.g., numerical values for math tasks, variable names
for coding tasks). Each task τ is paired with a ground-truth skill label s∗τ .

Similarity Distribution.       To control semantic overlap among skills, we define three similarity distributions
for library construction:
• Low (Diverse): Skills are sampled via round-robin across all 8 domains, maximizing semantic distance.
  Expected intra-library similarity is low.
• High (Similar): Skills are sampled from 2–3 semantically related domains (e.g., mathematics, analysis,
  extraction). Expected intra-library similarity is high.
• Mixed: Skills are sampled uniformly at random across all domains, producing a naturalistic distribution
  with both related and unrelated skills.
Unless otherwise specified, experiments use the mixed distribution to simulate realistic skill library composi-
tion.

Policy Complexity.      To study the effect of execution instruction verbosity, we define three levels of execution
policy complexity:
• Simple (∼30 tokens): Single-sentence instructions, e.g., “Execute the calculation and return the result.”
• Medium (∼100 tokens): Structured 3–5 step instructions with input validation and formatting guidelines.
• Complex (∼300 tokens): Detailed multi-section protocols including error handling, edge cases, output
  formatting requirements, and quality standards.
Unless otherwise specified, experiments use simple policies to isolate the effect of library size from instruction
complexity.

Evaluation Protocal. We evaluate skill selection performance on GPT-4o-mini and GPT-4o1 . The models
are queried with temperature T = 0 to ensure deterministic outputs. The selection prompt presents the skill
library as a formatted list and instructs the model to respond with only the skill identifier. For each experimental
condition, we measure selection accuracy as defined in Eq. (4.1). Each condition is repeated with 3 random
seeds to compute standard errors.

5.2       H1: Non-linear Phase Transition

Experimental Design. We evaluate selection accuracy across skill library sizes |S|                 ∈
{5, 10, 20, 35, 50, 75, 100, 150, 200}, holding similarity distribution (mixed) and policy complexity
(simple) constant. This isolates the effect of search space size on selection performance.2

Results. Figure 2 presents selection accuracy as a function of skill library size across both evaluated models.
We evaluate at |S| ∈ {5, 10, 20, 25, 30, 40, 50, 75, 100, 150, 200} and fit the proposed scaling law (Eq. 10).
Both models exhibit substantial accuracy degradation as library size increases. At small scales (|S| ≤ 20),
accuracy remains above 90%, but degrades steadily beyond |S| = 30, falling to approximately 20% at
|S| = 200. We observe a slight increase in accuracy as |S| grows from 5 to approximately 20. This likely
reflects improved task-skill coverage: at very small library sizes, some tasks may lack well-matched skills,
      1
    Our ongoing work extends the evaluation to additional models.
      2
    Although increasing |S| also increases prompt length, our goal is not to disentangle all context-length effects, but to
characterize the end-to-end difficulty of selecting among an expanding set of semantically-described actions.


                                                            11
                                             Scaling Law Fit: Acc              1 + (|S|/ )


                                 gpt-4o-mini                                                            gpt-4o
           1.0                                       =0.96               1.0                                           =0.98
                                                     =91.8                                                             =83.5
                                                     =1.72                                                             =1.56
           0.8                                                           0.8
Accuracy




                                                              Accuracy
           0.6                                                           0.6

           0.4                                                           0.4

           0.2       Empirical
                                                                         0.2          Empirical
                     Fit (R 2=0.978)                                                  Fit (R 2=0.968)
           0.0                                                           0.0
                 0        50           100     150      200                    0             50          100     150      200
                                       |S|                                                               |S|
Figure 2: Scaling law fit quality. The proposed functional form ACC ≈ α/(1 + (|S|/κ)γ ) achieves excellent
fit (R2 > 0.97) for both models, validating the theoretical model.


while moderate expansion improves coverage before selection overload begins. This non-monotonic behavior
at small |S| does not affect our main findings, which concern the capacity-limited regime at larger library sizes.
The decay exponent γ > 1 (1.72 and 1.56 respectively) indicates super-linear degradation, consistent with
phase transition behavior rather than gradual decay.
The fitted capacity parameter κ is 91.8 for GPT-4o-mini and 83.5 for GPT-4o, representing the library size
at which accuracy drops to half its maximum (α/2 ≈ 0.48–0.49). Interestingly, GPT-4o exhibits a slightly
lower κ than GPT-4o-mini, contrary to the intuition that stronger models should have higher capacity. We
offer two possible explanations: (1) this difference may reflect fitting variance given limited data points, or (2)
model capability and selection capacity may be partially independent; a more capable model is not necessarily
better at discriminating among many similar options. Further experiments across diverse model families are
needed to clarify this relationship. We note that κ should not be interpreted as the “onset” of degradation. The
inflection point, where accuracy begins to decline most rapidly, occurs earlier. For practical applications, we
recommend keeping flat skill libraries below this inflection point, or adopting hierarchical routing for larger
libraries.

5.3         H2: Confusability-Driven Errors

Experimental Design. To isolate the effect of confusability from library size, we design a controlled
experiment with explicit competitor generation. For each base skill (e.g., calculate_sum: “Add all numbers
together”), we generate 0, 1, or 2 competitor skills with similar descriptions but different underlying operations
(e.g., compute_average: “Compute the mean of all values”). Ground truth is ensured by construction: each
task is generated to require a specific operation (e.g., “compute the sum”), and only the base skill performs
that operation. Competitors have similar descriptions but would produce incorrect outputs if selected. For
instance, given input [3, 7, 2] and the task “compute the total,” only calculate_sum returns the correct
answer (12), while compute_average would return wrong answer (e.g., 4). Thus, the mapping from task to
base skill is unambiguous despite surface-level similarity among skill descriptions.
We define three confusability conditions:
• No Competitors (ncomp = 0): Each skill is semantically distinct. Total library size |S| = nbase .
• Low Confusability (ncomp = 1): Each base skill has one competitor. Total |S| = 2 × nbase .
• High Confusability (ncomp = 2): Each base skill has two competitors. Total |S| = 3 × nbase .
We vary nbase ∈ {5, 10, 15, 20} and evaluate on GPT-4o-mini and GPT-4o with 3 random seeds per condition.

Results. Figure 3 presents selection accuracy across confusability conditions. With no competitors, selection
accuracy remains at 100% even at |S| = 20. This contrasts sharply with the ∼95% accuracy observed in H1 at
the same library size with mixed similarity, confirming that semantic overlap is the primary error source.


                                                              12
                                       H4: Effect of Skill Competitors on Selection Accuracy
                                    gpt-4o-mini                                                    gpt-4o
           1.0                                                               1.0


           0.8                                                               0.8
Accuracy




                                                                  Accuracy
           0.6                                                               0.6


           0.4                                                               0.4


           0.2
                       No Competitors                                        0.2
                                                                                    No Competitors
                       Low (1 competitor)                                           Low (1 competitor)
                       High (2 competitors)                                         High (2 competitors)
           0.0                                                               0.0
                      10      20      30      40     50      60                    10      20      30       40   50   60
                                        |S|                                                          |S|
Figure 3: Effect of skill competitors on selection accuracy. Green: no competitors (each skill unique). Orange:
1 competitor per skill. Red: 2 competitors per skill. At fixed total library size, higher confusability leads to
lower accuracy, demonstrating that semantic similarity—not library size alone—drives selection errors.


Adding just one competitor per skill reduces accuracy by 7–30% (Low condition). Adding two competitors
causes 17–63% degradation (High condition), with GPT-4o-mini showing larger drops than GPT-4o. GPT-4o
consistently outperforms GPT-4o-mini under high confusability (e.g., 70% vs. 37% at nbase = 10, ncomp = 2),
suggesting that model capability provides partial mitigation against confusability. The confusability effect is
consistent across all tested nbase values, indicating a fundamental challenge rather than a small-scale artifact.
At identical |S| = 20, replacing unique skills with base-competitor pairs causes a 18–30% accuracy drop. This
demonstrates that semantic structure determines selection difficulty.
The results provide an important practical implication for skill library design: skill descriptors should
emphasize unique characteristics. Avoid generic descriptions that could apply to multiple skills (e.g., “process
data” → “compute rolling 7-day average”).
H1 and H2 together provide an important understanding of skill selection scaling. H1 establishes that accuracy
degrades with library size, while H2 reveals that this degradation is mediated by semantic confusability. The
phase transition observed in H1 likely reflects the accumulation of confusable skill pairs as libraries grow from
mixed sampling. This explains why the no-competitor condition in H2 maintains 100% accuracy at |S| = 20,
a size where H1’s mixed-similarity libraries show measurable degradation.

5.4              H3: Instructional Saturation

Experimental Design. To test whether execution policy complexity affects effective capacity, we compare
selection accuracy across three policy complexity levels (simple, medium, complex) at fixed library sizes
|S| ∈ {10, 20, 50, 100, 150}. In this experiment, the full execution policy πi is included in the selection
prompt alongside the descriptor δi , simulating scenarios where the selector must process detailed execution
instructions.

Results. Figure 4 visualizes the interaction between policy complexity and library size for both models.
Contrary to our hypothesis, the three policy complexity levels (simple, medium, complex) show largely
overlapping accuracy curves for both models. The differences between conditions fall within standard error
bounds at most library sizes. All complexity levels follow the same phase transition pattern observed in H1,
with accuracy declining sharply beyond |S| = 50. The absence of a complexity effect is consistent across both
GPT-4o-mini and GPT-4o, suggesting this is not a model-specific phenomenon.
The results do not support H2. We hypothesized that complex micro-policies would consume “cognitive
bandwidth,” effectively lowering the capacity threshold κ. However, the empirical data shows no meaningful
difference between simple and complex policies.
Several factors may explain this null result. First, we have to admit that our policy templates, while varying
in length, may not have introduced sufficient semantic complexity to stress the selection mechanism. Future
work could explore policies with more ambiguous or conflicting instructions. Given the template used, modern


                                                                  13
                            H2: Instructional Saturation        Complex Lowers Effective

                             gpt-4o-mini                                                  gpt-4o
           1.0                                      : simple                                                   : simple
                                                    : medium                                                   : medium
                                                    : complex                                                  : complex
           0.8
Accuracy




                                                                Accuracy
           0.6

           0.4

           0.2

           0.0
                 20    40   60    80    100   120    140                   20   40   60     80     100   120    140
                                  |S|                                                      |S|
Figure 4: Effect of execution policy complexity on selection accuracy. Each panel shows results for one model.
Contrary to expectations, the three complexity levels show largely overlapping performance curves.


transformer architectures may efficiently filter relevant information from long contexts, mitigating the expected
cognitive load from complex policies.

5.5          H4: Hierarchy Mitigation

Experimental Design.          We compare three selection strategies:
• Flat Selection: Direct selection from all |S| skills (baseline).
• Naive Domain Hierarchy: Two-stage selection where Stage 1 selects a domain category and Stage 2 selects
  within that domain.
• Confusability-Aware Hierarchy: Two-stage selection where semantically similar skills (competitors) are
  explicitly grouped together. Stage 1 selects among distinct clusters; Stage 2 disambiguates within a small
  cluster of similar skills.
To properly test hierarchy at scale, we extend the library size range beyond the capacity threshold identified in
H1. We construct skill libraries with ngroups ∈ {4, 6, 8, 10, 20, 30, 40} groups, each containing 3 semantically
similar skills (1 base + 2 competitors), yielding total library sizes |S| ∈ {12, 18, 24, 30, 60, 90, 120}.
Each group represents a distinct functionality (e.g., “Summation”, “Averaging”, “Email Writing”), while skills
within a group are near-synonyms (e.g., “Calculate Sum”, “Compute Total”, “Sum Numbers”). Tasks are
generated to map to the base skill of each group, ensuring unambiguous ground truth.

Results. Figure 5 presents selection accuracy across library sizes for all three methods. When library size
exceeds the capacity threshold (|S| ≥ 60, approaching κ ≈ 90), hierarchical routing recovers substantial
accuracy. For GPT-4o-mini, hierarchy improves accuracy by +37–40% absolute (from ∼45% to ∼83–85%).
For GPT-4o, the improvement is +9–10% (from ∼63% to ∼72%). Flat selection accuracy drops precipitously
as |S| increases beyond 30, consistent with the phase transition identified in H1. Flat selection at |S| = 120
operates far beyond κ, yielding the observed ∼45–63% accuracy. In contrast, hierarchical methods maintain
relatively stable accuracy (∼72–85%) across all tested sizes up to |S| = 120. Both hierarchical methods
perform similarly, as our experimental design naturally aligns domain boundaries with confusability clusters.
In practice, the key factor is grouping skills such that first-stage routing involves distinct, easily-discriminable
categories.GPT-4o shows higher flat accuracy than GPT-4o-mini (63% vs. 45% at large |S|), but also derives
smaller benefit from hierarchy (+10% vs. +40%). Stronger models partially compensate for scaling challenges
through better semantic discrimination. Both hierarchical methods perform similarly, as our experimental
design naturally aligns domain boundaries with confusability clusters. In practice, the key factor is grouping
skills such that first-stage routing involves distinct, easily-discriminable categories.
The results support H3 for library sizes exceeding the capacity threshold. The mechanism can be understood
through the lens of H1 and H4.Connecting to H1, flat selection fails when |S| > κ due to cognitive overload.
Hierarchy works by ensuring each selection stage operates within the reliable regime: Stage 1 involves


                                                            14
                                                        H3: Hierarchy Mitigation (Revised)
                                      gpt-4o-mini                                                              gpt-4o
           1.0                                                                        1.0


           0.8                                                                        0.8
Accuracy




                                                                           Accuracy
           0.6                                                                        0.6


           0.4                                                                        0.4


           0.2
                          Flat Selection                                              0.2
                                                                                                 Flat Selection
                          Naive Hierarchy (Domain)                                               Naive Hierarchy (Domain)
                          Confusability-Aware                                                    Confusability-Aware
           0.0                                                                        0.0
                     20         40      60         80        100     120                    20         40      60         80   100   120
                                             |S|                                                                    |S|
Figure 5: Effect of hierarchical routing on selection accuracy. Blue: flat selection. Red: naive domain
hierarchy. Green: confusability-aware hierarchy. At large library sizes (|S| ≥ 60), hierarchy maintains
∼72–85% accuracy while flat selection degrades to ∼45–63%.



∼10–40 distinct clusters (well below κ), and Stage 2 involves only 3 skills per cluster. Connecting to H2,
confusability-aware grouping ensures that first-stage categories are semantically distinct (low confusability →
high accuracy), while confusable skills are handled together in a small second-stage pool (high confusability
but small |S| → manageable).


5.6              Practical Guidelines and Limitation Discussion

Based on our findings, we recommend the following guidelines for skill library design in LLM-based agents:

      Design Guidelines

      Based on our findings, we recommend the following guidelines for skill library design in LLM-based
      agents:
      1. Monitor library size: Track |S| relative to the model’s capacity (κ ≈ 50–100 for the tested GPT
         models). Performance degrades sharply beyond this threshold.
      2. Minimize confusability: Before adding skills, audit semantic overlap. Merge or differentiate skills
         with similarity above threshold rather than accumulating near-duplicates.
      3. Adopt hierarchy at scale: For large |S| ≫ κ, implement hierarchical routing with confusability-aware
         grouping. Each stage should involve < κ options.
      4. Invest in descriptors: Since selection relies on descriptors (H2), invest effort in crafting or optimizing
         distinctive, specific descriptions.
      5. Match model to task: Stronger models show higher κ and better confusability resistance. For
         applications with inherently large or confusable skill libraries, model capability investment yields
         direct accuracy benefits.
      6. Consider alternative architectures: For large skill libraries, the scaling limitations suggest that
         multi-agent architectures with specialized routers may outperform monolithic single-agent approaches.



Limitations. We acknowledge several limitations. 1. Synthetic data: While enabling controlled experiments,
synthetic skill libraries may not capture the full complexity of real-world skill distributions. 2. Selection-only
evaluation: We measure selection accuracy but not end-to-end task performance. 3. Limited model coverage:
Results are based on two OpenAI models; generalization to other architectures requires further study. 4.
Hierarchy design: Designing the best solution to mitigate performance degration associated with scaling is
not the focus of this work, so our hierarchical approaches were relatively simple; more sophisticated routing
mechanisms may yield different results.


                                                                           15
6   Conclusion and Future Directions
As LLM-based agents take on increasingly complex tasks, the design of their action spaces becomes a first-
order concern. Our work suggests that skill-based modularity offers a promising middle ground between
monolithic prompting and expensive multi-agent coordination, but that this approach has inherent scaling
limits rooted in the nature of selection itself. Our preliminary experiments suggest this compilation can yield
substantial efficiency gains while preserving task performance—at least when skill libraries remain small.
More fundamentally, we investigate a question that has received limited attention: how does skill selection
scale? Our experiments reveal a non-linear scaling pattern, where selection accuracy remains stable up to a
critical threshold before degrading sharply. We find suggestive evidence that semantic confusability among
skills also plays a central role in this degradation. Drawing on cognitive psychology, we propose that LLM skill
selection may exhibit capacity limits analogous to human decision-making, and that hierarchical organization
can help mitigate these limits.
We acknowledge several limitations that may temper the strength of our conclusions. Thus, we acknowledge
several future directions worthy of further investigation:
• Broader model coverage: Extending experiments to diverse model families (open-source models, different
  scales, multimodal models) would clarify whether the capacity thresholds we observe are universal or
  architecture-specific.
• Real-world skill libraries: Evaluating on naturally-occurring skill distributions, such as those emerging
  from software development, long-horizon planning, or scientific workflows, would test the ecological validity
  of our findings.
• End-to-end evaluation: Measuring how selection errors propagate to final task outcomes would provide a
  more complete picture of when skill-based systems are viable alternatives to multi-agent approaches.
• Adaptive routing mechanisms: Exploring learned or dynamic routing strategies that adapt to task context
  and skill library structure may offer better scaling than fixed hierarchies.
• Theoretical foundations: Developing formal models that explain why capacity limits emerge and poten-
  tially connecting to information-theoretic or mechanistic interpretability perspectives would strengthen the
  scientific grounding of our observations.
We hope the questions and preliminary findings presented here will stimulate further investigation into the
cognitive-like constraints that shape what AI agents can effectively do.

Acknowledgment. This paper represents ongoing research, and we welcome feedback, corrections, and
suggestions from the community. In accordance with emerging norms for transparency in academic writing,
we disclose that AI writing assistants were used to support editing and literature organization during the
preparation of this manuscript. We have carefully reviewed and verified the content. The author thanks Dr.
Ruiyang Ge for valuable discussions on cognitive science foundations and for suggesting relevant literature
connecting our findings to established theories in human decision-making and is grateful to Yushu Li for
providing feedback on early drafts of this manuscript. This work was partially funded by the NSERC Discovery
Grant RGPIN-2022-05316, NSERC Alliance Grant ALLRP 602633-24, Tri-Agency Canada IITP, and the
Ministry of Science and ICT (No. RS-2024-00445087), CIFAR AI Chair Awards, and Canada Research Chair
Fellowship.

References
John R Anderson. Retrieval of propositional information from long-term memory. Cognitive Psychology, 6(4):
  451–474, 1974.
John R Anderson. A spreading activation theory of memory. Journal of verbal learning and verbal behavior,
  22(3):261–295, 1983.
John R Anderson and Lynne M Reder. The fan effect: New results and new theories. Journal of Experimental
  Psychology: General, 128(2):186, 1999.
Anthropic. Agent skills overview. https://docs.anthropic.com/en/docs/agents-and-tools/
  agent-skills/overview, 2025a. Accessed: 2026-01-07.
Anthropic. Equipping agents for the real world with agent skills. https://www.anthropic.com/
  engineering/equipping-agents-for-the-real-world-with-agent-skills, 2025b. Anthropic
  Engineering Blog. Accessed: 2026-01-07.


                                                      16
William G Chase and Herbert A Simon. Perception in chess. Cognitive Psychology, 4(1):55–81, 1973.
Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared Kaplan, Harri
 Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, et al. Evaluating large language models trained on
 code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374, 2021.
Weize Chen, Yusheng Su, Jingwei Zuo, Cheng Yang, Chenfei Yuan, Chi-Min Chan, Heyang Yu, Yaxi Lu,
 Yi-Hsin Hung, Chen Qian, et al. Agentverse: Facilitating multi-agent collaboration and exploring emergent
 behaviors. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2024.
Weize Chen, Jiarui Yuan, Chen Qian, Cheng Yang, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. Optima: Optimizing effec-
 tiveness and efficiency for llm-based multi-agent system. In Findings of the Association for Computational
 Linguistics: ACL 2025, pages 11534–11557, 2025.
Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser, Matthias
  Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, Christopher Hesse, and John Schulman. Training
  verifiers to solve math word problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168, 2021.
Taicheng Guo, Xiuying Chen, Yaqi Wang, Ruidi Chang, Shichao Pei, Nitesh V Chawla, Olaf Wiest, and
  Xiangliang Zhang. Large language model based multi-agents: A survey of progress and challenges. In
  Proceedings of the Thirty-Third International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI), pages
  8048–8057, 2024.
William E Hick. On the rate of gain of information. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 4(1):
 11–26, 1952.
Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza Rutherford,
  Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, et al. Training compute-optimal
  large language models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 35,
  pages 30016–30030, 2022.
Sirui Hong, Mingchen Zhuge, Jonathan Chen, Xiawu Zheng, Yuheng Cheng, Ceyao Zhang, Jinlin Wang, Zili
  Wang, Steven Ka Shing Yau, Zijuan Lin, et al. Metagpt: Meta programming for a multi-agent collaborative
   framework. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2024.
Ray Hyman. Stimulus information as a determinant of reaction time. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 45
  (3):188–196, 1953.
Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child, Scott Gray,
  Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. Scaling laws for neural language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2001.08361, 2020.
Yubin Kim et al. Towards a science of scaling agent systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.08296, 2025.
Eric Lee and James MacGregor. Minimizing user search time in menu retrieval systems. Human Factors, 27
  (2):157–162, 1985.
Guohao Li, Hasan Abed Al Kader Hammoud, Hani Itani, Dmitrii Khizbullin, and Bernard Ghanem. Camel:
  Communicative agents for “mind” exploration of large language model society. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 36, pages 51991–52008, 2023.
Yaobo Liang, Chenfei Wu, Ting Song, Wenshan Wu, Yan Xia, Yu Liu, Yang Ou, Shuai Lu, Lei Ji, Shaoguang
  Mao, et al. Taskmatrix.ai: Completing tasks by connecting foundation models with millions of apis.
  Intelligent Computing, 3:0063, 2024.
Langdon E Longstreth. Hick’s law: Its limit is 3 bits. Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society, 26(1):8–10, 1988.
Ian R McKenzie, Alexander Lyzhov, Michael Pieler, Alicia Parrish, Aaron Mueller, Ameya Prabhu, et al.
  Inverse scaling: When bigger isn’t better. Transactions on Machine Learning Research (TMLR), 2023.
Eric J Michaud, Ziming Liu, Uzay Girit, and Max Tegmark. The quantization model of neural scaling. In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 36, pages 42540–42569, 2023.
Dwight P Miller. The depth/breadth tradeoff in hierarchical computer menus. Proceedings of the Human
 Factors Society, 25(1):296–300, 1981.


                                                     17
George A Miller. The magical number seven, plus or minus two: Some limits on our capacity for processing
  information. Psychological Review, 63(2):81–97, 1956.

Robert M Nosofsky. Attention, similarity, and the identification–categorization relationship. Journal of
  Experimental Psychology: General, 115(1):39–57, 1986.

Joon Sung Park, Joseph C O’Brien, Carrie J Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and Michael S
  Bernstein. Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior. In Proceedings of the 36th Annual
  ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (UIST), pages 1–22, 2023.

Shishir G Patil, Tianjun Zhang, Xin Wang, and Joseph E Gonzalez. Gorilla: Large language model connected
  with massive apis. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 37, 2024.

Yujia Qin, Shengding Hu, Yankai Lin, Weize Chen, Ning Ding, Ganqu Cui, Zheni Zeng, Yufei Huang, Chaojun
  Xiao, Chi Han, et al. Tool learning with foundation models. ACM Computing Surveys, 2024a.

Yujia Qin, Shihao Liang, Yining Ye, Kunlun Zhu, Lan Yan, Yaxi Lu, Yankai Lin, Xin Cong, Xiangru Tang, Bill
  Qian, et al. Toolllm: Facilitating large language models to master 16000+ real-world apis. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2024b. Spotlight.

Changle Qu, Sunhao Dai, Xiaochi Wei, Hengyi Cai, Shuaiqiang Wang, Dawei Yin, Jun Xu, and Ji-Rong Wen.
  Tool learning with large language models: A survey. Frontiers of Computer Science, 19(8):198343, 2025.

Rylan Schaeffer, Brando Miranda, and Sanmi Koyejo. Are emergent abilities of large language models a
  mirage? In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 36, pages 55565–55581,
  2023.

Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessì, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Luke Zettlemoyer, Nicola
  Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves to use tools. In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 36, pages 68539–68551, 2023.

Yongliang Shen, Kaitao Song, Xu Tan, Dongsheng Li, Weiming Lu, and Yueting Zhuang. Hugginggpt: Solving
  ai tasks with chatgpt and its friends in hugging face. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
  (NeurIPS), volume 36, pages 38154–38180, 2023.

Roger N Shepard. Toward a universal law of generalization for psychological science. Science, 237(4820):
 1317–1323, 1987.

John Sweller. Cognitive load during problem solving: Effects on learning. Cognitive Science, 12(2):257–285,
  1988.

John Sweller, Paul Ayres, and Slava Kalyuga. Cognitive Load Theory. Springer, 2011.

Amos Tversky. Elimination by aspects: A theory of choice. Psychological Review, 79(4):281–299, 1972.

Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan, and Anima
 Anandkumar. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models. Transactions on
 Machine Learning Research (TMLR), 2023a.

Zihao Wang, Shaofei Cai, Guanzhou Chen, Anji Liu, Xiaojian Ma, and Yitao Liang. Describe, explain, plan
  and select: Interactive planning with large language models enables open-world multi-task agents. In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 36, pages 34153–34189, 2023b.

Jason Wei, Najoung Kim, Yi Tay, and Quoc V Le. Inverse scaling can become u-shaped. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2211.02011, 2022a.

Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel, Barret Zoph, Sebastian Borgeaud, Dani Yogatama, Maarten
  Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, et al. Emergent abilities of large language models. Transactions on
  Machine Learning Research (TMLR), 2022b.

Junde Wu, Jiayuan Zhu, Yuyuan Liu, Min Xu, and Yueming Jin. Agentic reasoning: A streamlined framework
  for enhancing llm reasoning with agentic tools. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.04644, 2025.


                                                     18
Qingyun Wu, Gagan Bansal, Jieyu Zhang, Yiran Wu, Beibin Li, Erkang Zhu, Li Jiang, Xiaoyun Zhang,
  Shaokun Zhang, Jiale Liu, et al. Autogen: Enabling next-gen llm applications via multi-agent conversation.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2024.
Peng Xia, Jinglu Wang, Yibo Peng, Kaide Zeng, Xian Wu, Xiangru Tang, Hongtu Zhu, Yun Li, Shujie Liu,
  Yan Lu, et al. Mmedagent-rl: Optimizing multi-agent collaboration for multimodal medical reasoning.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.00555, 2025.
Tingting Yang, Ping Feng, Qixin Guo, Jindi Zhang, Jiahong Ning, Xinghan Wang, and Zhongyang Mao.
  Autohma-llm: Efficient task coordination and execution in heterogeneous multi-agent systems using hybrid
  large language models. IEEE Transactions on Cognitive Communications and Networking, 2025.
Zhilin Yang, Peng Qi, Saizheng Zhang, Yoshua Bengio, William W. Cohen, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and
  Christopher D. Manning. HotpotQA: A dataset for diverse, explainable multi-hop question answering.
  In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
  2369–2380, 2018.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. React: Syn-
  ergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In International Conference on Learning Representations
  (ICLR), 2023.
Yanwei Yue, Guibin Zhang, Boyang Liu, Guancheng Wan, Kun Wang, Dawei Cheng, and Yiyan Qi. Masrouter:
  Learning to route llms for multi-agent systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.11133, 2025.
Biao Zhang, Zhongtao Liu, Colin Cherry, and Orhan Firat. When scaling meets llm finetuning: The effect of
  data, model and finetuning method. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.17193, 2024.




                                                    19
A     Related Work

In addition to the related work discussion on cognitive science in Sec 4.1, we also relate our work to the
intersection of three research areas: tool use in LLMs, multi-agent systems, and scaling laws. Our contribution
is distinguished by its focus on the scaling behavior of skill selection—a problem that has received limited
systematic study despite its centrality to agent system design.

A.1   Tool Use in LLMs

Recent work has dramatically expanded LLMs’ capabilities by augmenting them with external tools. Schick
et al. [2023] introduced Toolformer, demonstrating that LLMs can learn to use tools (calculators, search
engines, translation systems) in a self-supervised manner. ReAct [Yao et al., 2023] established the influential
paradigm of interleaving reasoning traces with tool-use actions, enabling dynamic decisions about when to
invoke external capabilities versus rely on internal knowledge.
As tool ecosystems have grown, the challenge of tool selection has become increasingly prominent. Tool-
LLM [Qin et al., 2024b] scaled to over 16,000 real-world APIs, introducing a neural retriever for tool selection
and depth-first search for multi-step planning. Gorilla [Patil et al., 2024] demonstrated retriever-aware training
for API selection, while HuggingGPT [Shen et al., 2023] and TaskMatrix.AI [Liang et al., 2024] proposed
architectures where LLMs orchestrate specialized models based on task descriptions. Comprehensive sur-
veys [Qin et al., 2024a, Qu et al., 2025] have formalized tool learning into stages: planning, selection, calling,
and response generation.
Our work differs from this literature in two key respects. First, we distinguish skills from tools: while tools
are typically atomic external APIs with minimal descriptive overhead, skills are internalized capabilities
comprising rich semantic descriptors and execution policies. This distinction matters because skills impose
greater cognitive load during selection. Second, rather than proposing new selection mechanisms, we
characterize the fundamental scaling limits of selection accuracy by establishing capacity thresholds (κ) and
identifying confusability as the primary driver of degradation.

A.2   Multi-Agent LLM Systems

Multi-agent systems (MAS) have emerged as a prominent paradigm for complex task solving. AutoGen [Wu
et al., 2024] introduced flexible multi-agent conversation frameworks with customizable agent interactions.
MetaGPT [Hong et al., 2024] encodes Standardized Operating Procedures (SOPs) into agent workflows,
demonstrating that structured role assignment enables effective coordination. CAMEL [Li et al., 2023]
pioneered role-playing frameworks for autonomous agent cooperation, while AgentVerse [Chen et al., 2024]
explored dynamic agent group composition with expert recruitment mechanisms.
A parallel line of work has focused on skill acquisition and management in agents. Voyager [Wang et al.,
2023a] introduced an ever-growing skill library for embodied agents, where skills are indexed by embeddings
and retrieved compositionally. Generative Agents [Park et al., 2023] established foundational architectures
with memory, reflection, and planning modules. DEPS [Wang et al., 2023b] addressed skill selection through
interactive planning with sub-goal ranking.
Our work provides a theoretical bridge between MAS and single-agent skill-based systems. We show that
certain types of MAS can be compiled into equivalent single-agent systems with skill libraries, and characterize
when this compilation is beneficial versus when the resulting skill library exceeds cognitive capacity. This
perspective reveals that hierarchical multi-agent organization is not merely an architectural choice but a
necessary mitigation when skill libraries grow beyond the capacity threshold κ.

A.3   Scaling Laws and Emergent Abilities

Neural scaling laws [Kaplan et al., 2020, Hoffmann et al., 2022] have established power-law relationships
between model size, data, compute, and loss. These findings have been extended to understand emergent
abilities—capabilities that appear suddenly at specific scale thresholds rather than improving gradually [Wei
et al., 2022b]. The nature of these phase transitions remains debated. Schaeffer et al. [2023] argued that
apparent emergent abilities may be artifacts of nonlinear metrics rather than fundamental behavioral changes.
Michaud et al. [2023] proposed that network capabilities are “quantized” into discrete skills learned in order
of decreasing frequency, with smooth aggregate scaling masking discrete phase transitions in individual capa-


                                                       20
bilities. Recent work has documented U-shaped [Wei et al., 2022a] and inverted-U scaling patterns [McKenzie
et al., 2023], where performance can decrease before improving at larger scales.
Scaling laws for downstream tasks and agent systems have received growing attention. Zhang et al. [2024]
studied how fine-tuning data scales with model size, while Kim et al. [2025] derived quantitative principles for
agent system scaling, examining trade-offs between agent quantity, coordination structure, and task properties.
Unlike prior work on emergent abilities that focuses on model scale, we study scaling with respect to action
space size—the number of skills an agent must select among. We show that this scaling is mediated by
semantic confusability, connecting LLM behavior to established principles from cognitive psychology [Hick,
1952, Shepard, 1987, Sweller, 1988].


B     MAS-to-SAS Compilaton Algorithm


Algorithm 3 MAS-to-SAS Compilation
Require: Multi-Agent Graph G = (A, E), Compiler Model MLLM
Ensure: Unified Skill Library S
 1: Initialize S ← ∅
    {Phase 1: Capability Extraction & Classification}
 2: for all Agent ai ∈ A do
 3:    Let ρi be the system prompt (role definition)
 4:    Let τi be the set of explicitly assigned tools
 5:    Analyze Role: Decompose ρi into a set of discrete capabilities Ci = {c1 , c2 , . . . }.
 6:    for all Capability ck ∈ Ci do
 7:       Determine Backend:
 8:       if ck aligns with a tool t ∈ τi then
 9:          Set ξk ← t {Externalized Skill}
10:          Generate πk : “How to use t to achieve ck under role ρi ”
11:       else
12:          Set ξk ← ∅ {Internalized Skill}
13:          Generate πk : “Reasoning steps to perform ck ”
14:       end if
15:       Generate Skill Descriptor δk (Name + Description)
16:       Store ŝk = (δk , πk , ξk , owner = ai )
17:    end for
18: end for
    {Phase 2: Topology Internalization (Constraints)}
19: for all Skill ŝk ∈ extracted skills do
20:    Let asrc = ŝk .owner
21:    Identify downstream agents: Nout = {aj | (asrc , aj ) ∈ E}
22:    if Nout ̸= ∅ then
23:       Generate Handoff Constraint:
24:       “Output must be consumable by skills: [skills of Nout ]”
25:       πk ← πk ⊕ Constraint
26:    end if
27:    Add (δk , πk , ξk ) to S
28: end for
29: return S




C     Experimental Details

C.1   Skill Library Examples

Table 4 presents example skills from each domain in our synthetic skill library. Each skill consists of a unique
identifier, a natural language descriptor, and an execution policy.


                                                       21
                   Table 4: Example skills from different domains in our synthetic skill library.
          Domain            Skill Name                Descriptor
          Mathematics       Calculate Sum             Add all numbers together and return the total sum.
                            Calculate Average         Compute the arithmetic mean of the given numbers.
                            Calculate Percentage      Compute what percentage one number is of another.

          Coding            Write Python Function     Write a Python function that implements the specified
                                                      functionality.
                            Debug Code                Find and fix bugs in the provided code snippet.

          Writing           Write Email               Compose a professional email based on the given re-
                                                      quirements.
                            Write Summary             Create a concise summary of the provided text.

          Analysis          Analyze Sentiment         Determine the emotional tone (positive/negative/neutral)
                                                      of the text.
                            Analyze Trend             Identify patterns and trends in the provided data.

          Extraction        Extract Names             Identify and extract all person names mentioned in the
                                                      text.
                            Extract Dates             Identify and extract all dates mentioned in the text.

          Translation       Translate to Spanish      Translate the given English text into Spanish.
                            Translate to French       Translate the given English text into French.

          QA                Answer Question           Provide a direct answer to the given question.
                            Explain Concept           Explain the given concept in clear, simple terms.

          Formatting        Convert to JSON           Convert the given data into JSON format.
                            Format as Markdown        Format the given content as Markdown.



C.2   Task Examples

Table 5 shows example tasks with their ground-truth skill mappings. Tasks are generated using domain-specific
templates with randomized parameters.


                            Table 5: Example tasks with ground-truth skill mappings.
      Domain            Task Query                                                        Ground Truth
      Mathematics       What is the sum of 23, 45, and 67?                                Calculate Sum
      Mathematics       What is the average of 10, 20, 30, 40, 50?                        Calculate Average
      Mathematics       What is 25% of 200?                                               Calculate Percentage
      Coding            Write a Python function to reverse a string.                      Write Python Function
      Coding            Debug this code: def add(a,b): return a-b                         Debug Code
      Writing           Write an email to my manager requesting a meeting.                Write Email
      Writing           Summarize the following article: [text]                           Write Summary
      Analysis          What is the sentiment of: “I love this product!”                  Analyze Sentiment
      Extraction        Extract names from: “John met Mary at the park.”                  Extract Names
      Extraction        Extract dates from: “Meeting on Jan 15, 2024.”                    Extract Dates
      Translation       Translate to Spanish: “Hello, how are you?”                       Translate to Spanish




C.3   Competitor Skill Examples

Table 6 illustrates the base skill and competitor skill design used in H2 experiments. Competitors have
near-identical functionality but different surface forms, creating semantic confusability.


                                                           22
Table 6: Examples of base skills and their semantic competitors (H2). Competitors have similar functionality
but different phrasing.
           Role            Skill Descriptor
           Skill Group: Summation
           Base            Calculate Sum: Add all numbers together and return the total.
           Competitor 1    Compute Total: Compute the total by adding all values together.
           Competitor 2    Sum Numbers: Sum up all the given numbers.
           Skill Group: Email Writing
           Base            Write Email: Compose a professional email.
           Competitor 1    Compose Email: Compose an email message.
           Competitor 2    Draft Email: Draft an email for the given purpose.
           Skill Group: Sentiment Analysis
           Base            Analyze Sentiment: Determine the sentiment of the text.
           Competitor 1    Sentiment Detector: Detect the emotional tone.
           Competitor 2    Evaluate Sentiment: Evaluate text sentiment.
           Skill Group: Name Extraction
           Base            Extract Names: Extract person names from text.
           Competitor 1    Find Names: Find all names in the text.
           Competitor 2    Name Extractor: Extract names from content.


C.4   Policy Complexity Examples

Figure 6 illustrates the three levels of policy complexity used in H3 experiments, using the “Calculate Sum”
skill as an example.

C.5   Prompt Templates

Flat Selection Prompt.     Figure 7 shows the prompt template used for flat skill selection in all experiments.

Hierarchical Selection Prompts. Figure 8 shows the two-stage prompts used for hierarchical selection in
H4.




                                                        23
Simple Policy (∼30 tokens)

Execute the addition and return the result.



Medium Policy (∼100 tokens)

You are a mathematical computation assistant.
1. Parse all numerical values from the input
2. Validate that all values are valid numbers
3. Compute the sum of all values
4. Return the result as a single number



Complex Policy (∼300 tokens)

You are an expert mathematical computation agent.
Input Processing
1. Parse all numerical values from the input string
2. Handle both integers and floating-point numbers
3. Validate that all extracted values are valid numbers
Computation
4. Initialize accumulator to zero
5. Iterate through all validated numbers
6. Add each number to the accumulator
Output Requirements
7. Return the final sum as a formatted number
8. Use appropriate decimal precision (2 decimal places)
9. Handle edge cases: empty input returns 0
Error Handling
- If non-numeric values are found, report an error
- If input is empty, return 0 with a note


   Figure 6: Examples of the three policy complexity levels for the “Calculate Sum” skill.



Flat Selection Prompt

Select the most appropriate skill for the given task.
Task:   {query}
Available Skills:
- skill_001: Calculate Sum: Add all numbers together and return the total.
- skill_002: Calculate Average: Compute the arithmetic mean of the given
numbers.
- skill_003: Write Email: Compose a professional email.
- skill_004: Extract Names: Identify and extract all person names from text.
- skill_005: Translate to Spanish: Translate English text into Spanish.
Respond with ONLY the skill ID (e.g., skill_001).          Do not include any
explanation.


                    Figure 7: Example flat selection prompt with 5 skills.



                                             24
Stage 1: Category Selection

Select the most appropriate skill category for this task.
Task:   What is the sum of 23, 45, and 67?
Available Categories:
- Summation: Adding numbers together
- Averaging: Computing mean values
- Email Writing: Composing emails
- Sentiment Analysis: Analyzing emotional tone
- Name Extraction: Extracting names from text
Respond with ONLY the category name.



Stage 2: Skill Selection within Category

Select the most appropriate skill for this task.
Task:   What is the sum of 23, 45, and 67?
Available Skills in "Summation" category:
- skill_001: Calculate Sum: Add all numbers together and return the total.
- skill_002: Compute Total: Compute the total by adding all values.
- skill_003: Sum Numbers: Sum up all the given numbers.
Respond with ONLY the skill ID.


               Figure 8: Two-stage hierarchical selection prompts used in H4.




                                            25
