ProvenanceGuard: Source-Aware Factuality Verification for
MCP-Based LLM Agents
Ander Alvarez,1,∗ Santhiya Rajan, 1,† Samuel Mugel, 2,‡ and Rom´ an Or´ us1, 3, 4,§
1Multiverse Computing, Parque Cientifico y Tecnol´ ogico de Gipuzkoa,
Paseo de Miram´ on, 170, 20014 Donostia / San Sebasti´ an, Spain
2Multiverse Computing, Centre for Social Innovation,
192 Spadina Avenue Suite 509, Toronto, ON M5T 2C2, Canada
3Donostia International Physics Center, Paseo Manuel de Lardizabal 4, E-20018 San Sebasti´ an, Spain
4Ikerbasque Foundation for Science, Maria Diaz de Haro 3, E-48013 Bilbao, Spain
Many tool-using LLM agents use Model Context Protocol (MCP) to produce answers from het-
erogeneous evidence sources, including search results, APIs, databases, clinical records, formulary
tools, and other external systems exposed through tool servers. Existing factuality and faithfulness
metrics typically evaluate whether an answer is supported by the available context after evidence
has been pooled. This abstraction misses an important provenance-sensitive failure mode: a claim
may be supported somewhere in the evidence while being attributed to the wrong source. We call
this failure cross-source conflation.
We introduceProvenanceGuard, a source-aware verifier for MCP-grounded answers.Prove-
nanceGuardis the retained calibrated Router+NLI system: it consumes captured MCP traces
with stable tool IDs, source IDs, and raw tool outputs; decomposes an answer into atomic claims;
routes claims to source-specific evidence; checks support with NLI and an attention-derived token-
alignment proxy; and separately compares the claim’s stated attribution with the routed source.
It returns both per-claim source verdicts and an answer-level allow/block decision, and can in-
voke retrieval-augmented answer revision (RARR)-style repair to revise blocked answers before
re-verification.
We evaluate on a frozen prospective corpus of 281 captured medical-domain MCP-agent traces.
A 266-trace claim-adjudicated subset yields 2,325 LLM-assisted claim labels, split by trace into
train, validation, and held-out test partitions; the 361 held-out labels are then verified by human
experts, and the full 281-trace corpus is used for answer-level repair evaluation. On the 40-trace,
361-claim held-out split,ProvenanceGuardreaches block F1 0.802 and source accuracy 0.858
over 260 source-eligible claims. Source-blind claim/evidence baselines on the same packet reach
block F1 0.783 for MiniCheck, 0.758 for RAGAS Faithfulness, 0.662 for AlignScore, and 0.436 for
SummaC-ZS, but none emit claim-to-source IDs. On a harder multi-source adjudicated bench-
mark,ProvenanceGuardreaches block F1 0.846 over frozen extracted claims from the locked test
questions, while source-plus-relation accuracy drops to 0.229, showing that exact source ownership
remains difficult under many semantically close candidate sources. On the full trace set, a repair-
and-reverify loop resolves all 173 blocked answers, though 144 require conservative fallback rather
than substantive rewriting; on reconstructed multi-source test traces, a fresh answer-level repair re-
run resolves all 59 initially blocked answers with two terminal fallbacks. In 50 generated, clinically
framed conflation probes over frozen captured MCP evidence,ProvenanceGuarddetects all 50
deliberately injected source-attribution swaps in controlled probes with no retained wrong attribu-
tion. These results indicate that source attribution is an independent evaluation axis for factuality
verification in MCP-based agents.
I. INTRODUCTION
LLM agents that use Model Context Protocol (MCP)
increasingly operate over multiple external tools rather
than a single retrieved passage. They call tools through
MCP servers, inspect structured records, combine multi-
ple outputs, and often generate answers that mix source-
grounded facts with general background knowledge and
safety disclaimers. A medical agent may combine a
∗ Email: ander.alvarez@multiversecomputing.com
† Email: santhiya.rajan@multiversecomputing.com
‡ Email: sam.mugel@multiversecomputing.com
§ Email: roman.orus@multiversecomputing.com
PubMed abstract with a patient’s FHIR record, while
an enterprise agent may combine a CRM entry, a billing
record, and a support ticket. In such settings, factu-
ality verification must assess not only whether a claim
is supported somewhere in the available evidence, but
also whether the answer assigns the claim to the correct
source.
Consider an answer that states: “According to the
patient’s chart, empagliflozin reduced a mortality end-
point.” The mortality claim may be supported by a
clinical-trial abstract, but not by the patient’s chart. A
source-blind verifier that pools the chart and the abstract
can mark the claim as supported. A source-aware verifier
should instead reject the attribution because the eviden-
tial source is incorrect.
arXiv:2606.18037v1  [cs.AI]  16 Jun 2026

2
Claim in answer: “Empagliflozin reduced a mortality endpoint.”
Stated source in answer: patient chart
Patient chart
diagnosis, medications
same patient, wrong source
Literature abstract
mortality estimate
correct supporting source
PubMed metadata
title, journal, year
same topic, partial source
FHIR labs
patient values
same chart family, no support
Source-blind support
pooled evidence:supported
Source-aware verdict
support yes, attributionblock
routed supportstated attribution
same claim can be supported somewhere while attributed to the wrong source
FIG. 1. Why source-aware factuality is stricter than source-blind support. A claim can be supported by one MCP source while
the answer attributes it to another. Source-blind scoring sees support in pooled evidence;ProvenanceGuardseparately
checks whether the supporting source matches the stated or implied attribution.
The frozen 281-trace captured-agent corpus does not
by itself estimate the natural prevalence of this failure
mode: the captured random traces contain single source-
family outputs, or PubMed search plus metadata outputs
that remain within the literature family. We therefore
evaluate cross-source conflation with a targeted 50-case
source-conflation probe set over frozen captured MCP
evidence, where each probe contains one deliberate attri-
bution swap.
This distinction matters because many factuality sys-
tems were designed for summary consistency or retrieval
faithfulness. They typically score support against a con-
text, rather than claim-to-source ownership. Such scores
are informative for unsupported fabrication, but they
are insufficient for MCP-grounded agents whose answers
carry implicit or explicit provenance claims.
This paper makes four contributions:
1. We formulate source-attribution factuality for
MCP-grounded answers: a verifier must evaluate
both support and source ownership for each claim.
2. We introduceProvenanceGuard, a calibrated
source-aware Router+NLI verifier that decomposes
answers into claims, preserves stable MCP tool IDs
and source IDs from raw tool outputs, routes claims
to source-specific evidence, and detects cross-source
conflation.
3. We report a frozen captured medical-domain agent
benchmark built from 281 captured MCP-agent
traces, a 266-trace claim subset with 2,325 LLM-
assisted labels, and a 40-trace held-out packet with
complete MCP tool outputs and human-expert-
reviewed labels.
4. We compareProvenanceGuardagainst
MiniCheck, RAGAS Faithfulness, AlignScore,
and SummaC-ZS on the same held-out claim
packet, while separately evaluating RARR-style
repair on full captured traces and targeted
source-conflation probes.
The central claim is limited to source-attribution factu-
ality in MCP-grounded answers; we do not claim to solve
open-domain factuality detection, clinical safety valida-
tion, or parametric-knowledge correction.
II. RELATED WORK
Our work sits at the intersection of support verifica-
tion, source attribution, and tool-grounded agent evalu-
ation. We organize prior work by the kind of evidence
object each line of work preserves.
a. Fine-grained support verification.Factual consis-
tency systems such as FActScore, MiniCheck, SummaC,
AlignScore, and VeriScore evaluate whether generated
claims are supported by evidence [1–5]. Fine-grained
work decomposes generated text below the sentence level:
Dependency Arc Entailment localizes errors at depen-
dency arcs [6], QASemConsistency expresses predicate-
argument propositions as question-answer pairs [7], and
PrefixNLI studies entailment over generation prefixes
[8]. These methods motivate claim-level checking, but
they do not generally preserve claim-to-MCP-source IDs.
They are therefore relevant to binary allow/block deci-
sions but are not direct baselines for source attribution
metrics such as Top-1 source accuracy, recall@k, mean
reciprocal rank, or source-set Jaccard.
b. RAG faithfulness and attributed generation.
RAG evaluation frameworks such as RAGAS ask
whether answer statements are faithful to retrieved
context [9]. Other work studies answer generation with
citations and attribution: ALCE evaluates citation
quality for LLM-generated answers [10]; AttributedQA
formalizes attributed question answering [11]; AutoAIS
automates AIS-style attribution judgments [12, 13]; and
TRUE consolidates factual-consistency datasets across

3
summarization, dialogue, paraphrasing, and verification
[14]. More recent attribution work localizes evidence to
user-selected spans through LAQuer [15] or decomposes
generation into executable attribution programs [16].
These methods are close in motivation, but faithfulness
to pooled or cited context is not equivalent to source
ownership. A claim can be supported by one retrieved
source while being falsely attributed to another. ALCE
[10] evaluates whether LLM-generated citations point
to the correct supporting passage, which is the closest
existing task to source attribution. However, ALCE
operates at the passage or chunk level within a single
retrieved set, whereas MCP traces expose stable tool-
level source IDs that require a routing step to identify
which tool output is responsible for a given claim. Our
work can therefore be seen as extending citation-style
attribution to the tool-provenance layer.
c. Tool and source attribution in multi-source sys-
tems.As RAG systems become tool-using agents, at-
tribution must track which tool output supplied the ev-
idence. Atomic Information Flow models tool outputs,
LLM calls, and final responses as flows of atomic in-
formation through an orchestration graph [17]. Faith-
fulRAG focuses on conflicts between retrieved evidence
and parametric knowledge at the fact level [18], while
Answering with Faithfulness couples answer generation
with faithfulness prediction [19]. Our setting differs be-
cause MCP traces expose stable tool and source iden-
tifiers. We do not infer latent information flow or re-
solve parametric-knowledge conflicts; we verify whether
the answer’s stated or implied attribution matches the
routed MCP source.
d. Post-hoc revision and trained verifiers.RARR
[20] takes a generated passage, researches evidence, and
revises unsupported claims while preserving the original
style and structure. In our setting, RARR-style repair is
evaluated after source-aware blocking: the verifier rejects
an answer, repair attempts to produce a source-grounded
revision or conservative fallback, and the same verifier
rechecks the revised answer. Training-based approaches
improve consistency at generation or detection time, in-
cluding reinforcement learning with textual entailment
feedback [21], FactCC’s synthetic inconsistency classifier
[22], and RAGulator’s lightweight out-of-context detec-
tors for grounded generation [23]. These methods are
complementary to ProvenanceGuard, which operates as
an independent post-hoc check on black-box MCP-agent
outputs. For calibration specifically, alternatives include
Platt scaling, isotonic regression, and conformal predic-
tion; we adopt a random-forest calibrator because it han-
dles tabular verifier features after simple one-hot encod-
ing and numeric scaling.
e. Tool-use and agent traces.Tool-use evaluation
often studies whether agents call the right tools, com-
plete tasks, and produce valid final answers. Our focus
is narrower: after an agent has produced an answer and
the tool trace is available, can a verifier decide whether
each claim is supported by the source the answer cites or
implies? A related MCP community proposal has iden-
tified a similar gap: the proposed verification capability
for MCP servers [24] calls for structured verdicts with
confidence scores, mirroring our allow/block/unavailable
decision space. Our work provides a concrete implemen-
tation of this verification layer for the MCP trace set-
ting.
III. PROVENANCEGUARD
ProvenanceGuardverifies attribution in
provenance-preserving Model Context Protocol (MCP)
traces. The goal is not to prove that a source is clinically
or scientifically correct. The goal is narrower: when
an agent answer makes a factual claim,Provenance-
Guardasks whether the claim is supported by the
source it should be attributed to, and whether the
answer assigns the claim to the right MCP provenance
object. This framing is important in data-sensitive
domains, where an offline verifier can spend more
computation on reliable source attribution rather than
optimizing for interactive latency.
A. Trace Interface
ProvenanceGuardstarts from the trace object pro-
duced by a tool-using agent. A trace contains the user
request, the final assistant answer, and a list of complete
tool outputs. Each evidence object is represented as
ei = (tooli,source i,text i),
where tooli identifies the tool family, sourcei identifies the
provenance-bearing source within the trace, and text i is
the observed tool output or structured sub-output. Two
tool calls to the same tool family (e.g., two PubMed
searches with different queries) produce separate evi-
dence objects if their source IDs differ. The verifier never
collapses these evidence objects into a single anonymous
context. It carries the source identifier forward because
the same answer may combine patient-record evidence,
literature evidence, and metadata evidence.
The output of this stage is a source-preserving evidence
setE={e 1, . . . , en}paired with the assistant answery.
When a tool output lacks a stable source ID, the verifier
falls back to tool name as the provenance identifier. Ap-
pendix A gives the escaped JSON trace structure used
for this interface.
B. Atomic Claims
The next step decomposes the answer into checkable
claims,
C(y) ={c 1, . . . , cm}, m≤M.

4
User
query
MCP agent
core
Draft
answer
Tool calls
and servers
Source-bearing
trace
Answer + trace
packet
Atomic claim
decomposition
Source
routing
NLI support
check
Calibration
score
Attribution
check
Answer
gate
Verified
output
Block
RARR-style repair
candidate
FIG. 2. Sequential source-aware verification pipeline. The agent core calls MCP tools and produces a draft answer;Prove-
nanceGuardconsumes the answer and captured source-bearing tool traces, decomposes the answer into claims, routes claims
to MCP evidence, estimates support with NLI, token alignment, and calibration, checks attribution separately from support,
and sends blocked answers through repair and re-verification.
Eachc j should express one factual proposition. Literal
values that can change the meaning of a claim, such
as numbers, units, dates, identifiers, medication quan-
tities, and quoted values, are preserved exactly. If the
answer names a source family, such as patient history or
published literature, the decomposer also preserves that
stated attribution span.
Generic safety boilerplate is not treated as evidence-
bearing content unless it contains a concrete factual as-
sertion. This prevents template text from dominating
the claim set while keeping the verifier accountable for
factual statements that remain in the answer.
C. Source Routing
For each claim,ProvenanceGuardranks the source-
specific evidence objects before support checking. Letq j
be the embedding of claimc j, and lete s,1, . . . , es,ns be
the embedded chunks belonging to sources. The source
representation is the centroid
rs = 1
ns
nsX
i=1
es,i.
The router selects the highest-scoring source,
ˆsj = arg max
s
cos(qj, rs),
and records the routing margin between the top two
source scores. The top-ranked source is used for single-
source attribution. Top-krouting is used only as an anal-
ysis of whether the correct source is near the head of the
ranked list.
After routing, the premise is narrowed to claim-
relevant evidence and capped by a fixed length bud-
get. This premise-selection step controls distractor ef-
fects before NLI scoring: shorter premises reduce irrele-
vant context, while longer premises may improve recall
but increase truncation and distraction risk. The cur-
rent service default is 512 tokens for the premise–claim
pair, which avoids the earlier 256-token bottleneck while
staying within the base DeBERTa context window.
D. Support and Alignment
The routed premise and claim are then passed to a
natural-language-inference (NLI) model. The NLI rela-
tion is one of entailment, neutral, or contradiction. En-
tailment is evidence of support, contradiction is evidence
of conflict, and neutral means the routed source does not
provide enough support by itself.
ProvenanceGuardalso computes a heuristic token-
alignment proxy from NLI attention. This proxy is used
as an additional grounding signal, not as an indepen-
dently validated explanation of the NLI model. LetPbe
the premise token indices andH c the claim token indices
in the paired NLI encoding. For attention tensorA ℓ,h,
the alignment score for claim tokeni∈H c is
ai = max
j∈P
 
1
LK
LX
ℓ=1
KX
h=1
Aℓ,h
ij
!
,
whereLis the number of layers andKis the number
of attention heads. A content token is marked weakly
grounded when
ai < τmax
k
ak.
The supported-token ratio is computed over non-
stopword claim tokens. A claim with low token support
remains blocked even if the coarse NLI label is uncertain.
Literal values receive a stricter check. If an entailed
claim contains a protected value absent from the routed
premise after normalization, the claim is treated as un-
supported or contradictory. Conversely, a neutral NLI

5
output can be lexically rescued only when all protected
values are present and normalized content-term overlap,
|Tclaim ∩T premise|
|Tclaim| ,
exceeds a fixed rescue threshold. This rescue rule is re-
stricted to exact structured evidence; otherwise neutral
remains not enough evidence.
E. Calibrated Claim Decision
The previous stages produce several imperfect signals:
the router says which source is most likely responsible
for the claim, NLI estimates whether that routed premise
entails the claim, and alignment checks whether tokens
and protected values are grounded. None of these signals
is reliable enough on its own. A high route score can still
point to a semantically related but wrong source, and
a neutral NLI label can occur when structured evidence
supports the claim lexically but not in the form expected
by the NLI model.
The calibrated claim decision is therefore the support
decision for the routed source. It keeps the source iden-
tity fixed and learns an operating boundary from devel-
opment data using only verifier-internal features. Cal-
ibration should tune a verifier whose raw routing and
support scores are already meaningful; it should not re-
place source-aware modeling. The categorical inputs are
the NLI label, trace category, predicted tool family, and
router status. The numeric inputs are route score, NLI
score, routing margin, lexical overlap with the routed
source, lexical overlap with all trace evidence, claim
length, evidence-chunk count, protected-value counts,
missing protected-value counts, stated-attribution indi-
cator, and interaction features such as NLI-score times
route-score and route-score times lexical overlap. These
inputs are not source-blind baseline outputs; baseline sys-
tems are evaluated later and are never used to train or
calibrateProvenanceGuard.
The retained calibrator is a random-forest classifier
trained on the development training split. The target is
binary support for the routed source:z j = 1 when claim
cj is adjudicated supported by ˆs j, andz j = 0 for not-
enough-evidence, unsupported, contradiction, or failed-
source cases. Categorical features are one-hot encoded
and numeric features are standardized before fitting. The
forest uses 400 trees with maximum depth 5, minimum
leaf size 8, balanced class weights, bootstrap bagging,
Gini impurity splitting, and fixed seed 20260607. Be-
cause a random forest is not optimized by epoch-wise
gradient descent, we do not report a neural training-loss
curve; the relevant training objective is node-level Gini
impurity reduction, and the relevant operating curve is
the validation sweep over decision thresholds.
After fitting, the forest estimates
psup(cj,ˆsj) =P(z j = 1|ϕ(c j,ˆsj, E)),
whereϕis the feature vector assembled from routing,
NLI, alignment, lexical, and protected-value checks. The
support threshold is selected on validation by maximizing
block F1, with block accuracy used only as a tie-breaker.
The selected threshold is 0.65. A claim is passed forward
as supported only whenp sup(cj,ˆsj)≥0.65; otherwise it
is passed forward as blocked for the routed source.
This calibration step deliberately answers only one
question:is the claim supported by the routed MCP
source?It does not yet decide whether the answer de-
scribed that source correctly. The result passed to the
next stage is a tuple containing the calibrated support
decision, the routed source identifier, and the evidence
features that explain the decision.
F. Attribution and Conflation
Attribution is the second decision. Once calibration
has decided whether claimc j is supported by routed
source ˆsj,ProvenanceGuardcompares that routed
source with the source family stated or implied in the
answer. Explicit attribution spans are matched by lex-
ical aliases for patient-history, chart, FHIR, PubMed,
literature, metadata, and tool-name variants. If no ex-
plicit span is present, patient-specific claims default to
patient-record sources, literature-general claims default
to literature sources, and ambiguous claims are marked
unavailable rather than silently assigned. A claim can be
supported by some MCP source and still be wrong as an
attributed answer if the answer assigns it to a different
source. Leta j be the source family stated or implied
by claimc j, and let ˆsj be the routed supporting source.
ProvenanceGuardmarks a source conflation when the
calibrated support decision is positive buta j and ˆsj refer
to incompatible provenance families.
For example, a patient-specific fact may be supported
by a patient-history tool output but incorrectly intro-
duced as a literature finding. The factual content is then
not the only issue: the answer has also misrepresented
where the fact came from. This is the gap that source-
blind support checks cannot address.
G. Answer Decision
ProvenanceGuardaggregates claim decisions with
a fail-closed policy. An answer is blocked if any claim has
source conflation, high-confidence contradiction, missing
protected values, failed routing, or insufficient support.
An answer is allowed only when every factual claim is
supported by the appropriate routed source. Empty ev-
idence, malformed claims, or failed verifier components
are not silently accepted.

6
Routing
score, margin, tool
NLI
label and score
Lexical, token,
protected-value features
One-hot
+ scaling
RandomForest
support calibrator
psup(cj ,ˆsj)
Support verdict
at threshold 0.65
Support threshold
Validation block metric
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Block F1 Block recall
0.65
FIG. 3. Calibration layer. The calibrator receives only verifier-internal routing, NLI, lexical, token-alignment, and protected-
value features. It returns a calibrated support probability for the routed source and a binary support verdict after validation-
threshold selection. The lower panel shows the validation threshold sweep used to select the retained support threshold.
Item Retained calibration setting or result
Training target Binary claim support for the routed source: supported = 1, any blocked label = 0.
Rows 1,597 training claims, 367 validation claims, and 361 held-out claims.
Class balance Training: 1,171 supported and 426 blocked; validation: 213 supported and 154 blocked; held-out: 222
supported and 139 blocked.
Preprocessing One-hot encoding for NLI label, category, predicted tool, and router status; standard scaling for
numeric verifier features.
Random forest 400 trees, maximum depth 5, minimum leaf size 8, balanced class weights, Gini split criterion, bootstrap
bagging.
Threshold selection Validation sweep over thresholds 0.01–0.99; selected threshold 0.65 by block F1 with block accuracy as
the tie-breaker.
Validation result Block F1 0.841, precision 0.737, recall 0.981, block accuracy 0.845.
Held-out result Block F1 0.802, precision 0.673, recall 0.993, block accuracy 0.812; block F1 95% trace-bootstrap CI
[0.664, 0.900].
TABLE I. Training details for the retained calibrated claim decision. The random forest is non-neural and has no epoch-wise
loss curve; its split objective is Gini impurity, and the operating point is selected by the validation threshold curve in Figure 3.
H. Repair and Reverification
Blocked answers enter a bounded revise-and-reverify
loop. The repair step receives the original answer, the
claim-level verifier outputs, and the routed evidence. It
can rewrite unsupported spans, correct source attribu-
tion, or remove claims that cannot be grounded. The
reported implementation is RARR-style: it follows the
retrieve/revise/reverify pattern, but many blocked full-
trace cases terminate through deterministic evidence-
only rewrites, blocked-claim pruning, or conservative
non-claim fallback rather than the original open-web
RARR procedure. The revised answer is then evaluated
by the sameProvenanceGuardverifier.
The loop terminates when the revised answer passes
source-aware verification or when remaining unverified
content is replaced by a conservative non-claim response.
The RARR-style repair loop is therefore not treated as
a separate oracle; it is a repair mechanism whose output
must satisfy the same attribution-sensitive checks that
blocked the original answer.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
A. Captured MCP-Agent Traces
We evaluate the pipeline in Section III on captured
traces from a medical MCP-agent evaluation stack. Each
trace contains a clinician-facing question, the route se-
lected by the agent, the observed tool calls, complete
source-bearing tool outputs, and the final assistant reply.
The setting is useful for source-aware evaluation because
patient-record tools and literature-search tools produce

7
adjacent but distinct provenance objects. A correct an-
swer may need both kinds of evidence, but it should not
attribute a patient-record fact to literature or a literature
fact to the patient chart.
The full trace set is used for answer-level and repair
evaluation. A trace-level split with LLM-assisted claims
is used for claim-level support and source-attribution
scoring. This instantiates the trace interface in Sec-
tion III: the verifier receives the answer and the com-
plete list of MCP evidence objects, not a pooled retrieval
context.
a. Data governance.The frozen traces are internal
MCP-agent evaluation traces collected for this bench-
mark. Patient-like records, names, identifiers, and ap-
pendix examples are synthetic or de-identified bench-
mark artifacts; no protected health information is in-
cluded in the released artifact bundle. The study eval-
uates verifier behavior on captured tool outputs and is
not a clinical intervention or a medical-device validation
study.
B. Claim Labels
The claim-level evaluation follows the decomposition
step in Section III. Answers are decomposed into atomic
claims, and each claim receives an LLM-assisted support
label, relation label, and best-source annotation. Splits
are made by trace rather than by claim so that claims
from the same assistant answer do not appear in both
development and held-out evaluation.
The held-out split contains 40 traces and 361 claims.
Source metrics are computed only for claims with an ad-
judicated source target. Binary support metrics treat un-
supported, not-enough-evidence, contradiction, and con-
flation outcomes as block decisions.
We distinguish three related but separate claim units.
First, offline label construction uses model-assisted
claim-packet extraction and adjudication to create frozen
claims and labels; this is a benchmark-construction step,
not the reported runtime decomposer. Second, claim-
level scoring tables evaluateProvenanceGuardon
those frozen claims, so no runtime decomposer is in-
voked. Third, answer-level verification and repair must
split a full answer into claims at runtime; the reported
answer-level and repair experiments use the determinis-
tic rule-based decomposer for that stage. The runtime
decomposer filters boilerplate disclaimers and response-
level meta-commentary before routing and NLI scoring.
C. Multi-Source Adjudicated Benchmark
Extension
We also rerunProvenanceGuardon a harder multi-
source adjudicated benchmark. This packet is harder
than the primary 40-trace held-out split because it is rep-
resented as pairwise claim–candidate-source rows: each
claim case may have multiple candidate sources, includ-
ing same-topic distractors. Its labels are produced by a
groupedgpt-5.4LLM-as-a-judge pass over blind claim
packets and then validated before packaging. The fixed
policy combines the benchmark training split with ear-
lier two-judge positive-boost rows, while validation and
test use only the benchmark’s adjudicated rows. The
locked test split contains 59 questions, 254 claim cases,
and 2,587 pairwise source-candidate rows.
The benchmark is useful for the multi-tool cases that
the primary held-out split underrepresents. It con-
tains chart-plus-literature cases, literature-summary ver-
sus exact-citation cases, same-topic wrong-chart candi-
dates, and count/resource-summary claims. We report
these as stress slices rather than as separate training ob-
jectives.
The router+NLI rerun is scored on frozen indepen-
dently extracted answer claims associated with the same
locked test questions. This creates a small unit mis-
match: the pairwise benchmark split has 254 claim
cases, while the frozen extraction artifact contains 263
extracted claims for those 59 questions. We therefore re-
port both counts and make clear which unit each table
uses. Metrics from the pairwise comparison package and
metrics from the frozen extracted-claim rerun should not
be compared as if they were computed over the same
examples.
D. ProvenanceGuard Instantiation
The evaluated system instantiates each stage in Sec-
tion III. Atomic claims are routed to source-specific MCP
evidence by cosine similarity over source embeddings.
The routed premise is checked with NLI, token align-
ment, protected-value matching, and lexical rescue. A
RandomForest calibration layer then maps the verifier
features to a supported versus blocked claim decision for
the routed source. The support threshold is selected on
validation before held-out evaluation. This calibrated
support decision is passed to the attribution stage, which
separately checks whether the answer’s stated or implied
source matches the routed source. The NLI scorer uses
a 512-token pair budget by default, and the joint verifier
runtime now defaults to a 512-token pair budget for new
reruns; historical 256-token backbone runs are reported
as such rather than overwritten.
This setup is designed for offline or data-sensitive re-
view, where the cost of false attribution can dominate
latency concerns. It therefore favors conservative block-
ing and explicit source preservation over a low-latency
best-effort answer.
E. Claim Decomposition Measurement
The current artifacts do not contain a separately
human-authored gold decomposition set with span-level

8
281 full
MCP traces
266 claim-labeled
traces
Train + validation
1,597 + 367 claims
Held-out
40 traces
361 claims
Claim support +
source metrics
260 source-eligible
Answer repair
281 full traces
Locked multi-source
benchmark
59 test
questions
254 claim cases
2,587 pairwise rows
263 frozen
extracted claims
Multi-tool
stress slices
Router+NLI +
answer-level RARR-style repair
Frozen MCP
evidence
50 injected
source swaps
Controlled
conflation repair
primary captured-trace corpus
harder multi-source benchmark
targeted attribution probes
FIG. 4. Evaluation datasets and units used in the paper. The primary captured-trace corpus supports claim-level scoring,
source-blind baseline comparison, and full-trace repair. The newer locked multi-source benchmark is reported separately because
its pairwise source-candidate rows and frozen extracted claims use different units. A targeted 50-case source-conflation probe
set isolates explicit attribution errors.
Constant Reported setting
Maximum extracted claimsM20 in the service default; artifact-specific scripts report overrides where used.
Source embedding model all-MiniLM-L6-v2 SentenceTransformer, cosine similarity over normalized source embeddings.
Chunking/windowing Complete MCP tool outputs grouped by stable source ID; claim-relevant NLI window capped at 1,500 characters before tokenization.
NLI model MoritzLaurer/DeBERTa-v3-base-mnli-fever-anli.
NLI max length 512 tokens for new reported Router+NLI reruns; historical 256-token artifacts are labeled as historical.
Alignment thresholdτ0.35 of the maximum claim-token attention-derived score.
Minimum supported-token ratio 0.70 for entailment claims with token-alignment output.
Lexical rescue threshold 0.55 content-term overlap when protected values are present; 0.85 otherwise.
Protected-value normalization Lowercase alphanumeric, decimal, percentage, date, time, currency, and structured identifier tokens; embedded digits inside alphanumeric words are ignored.
Calibration model and threshold RandomForestClassifier, 400 trees, maximum depth 5, minimum leaf size 8, balanced class weights, threshold 0.65 selected on validation by block F1.
TABLE II. Operating constants for the reportedProvenanceGuardconfiguration. These values make explicit the non-learned
thresholds and model identifiers used in the frozen run.
or proposition-level recall. To make the decomposi-
tion stage measurable, we compare the deterministic
rule-based decomposer against the frozen independent
sentence-level extraction artifact on the locked bench-
mark test questions. We report this as reference-set
agreement, not as human gold decomposition accuracy.
The metric is still useful because it exposes over-splitting,
missed extracted claims, and protected-value preserva-
tion errors before the routing and NLI stages.
F. External Baselines
MiniCheck, RAGAS Faithfulness, AlignScore, and
SummaC-ZS are run on the same held-out claim packet
as source-blind support comparators. These baselines es-
timate whether a claim is supported by pooled evidence,
but they do not emit MCP source identifiers. They are
therefore compared on binary support metrics only, not
on source attribution.
G. Repair and Conflation Evaluation
RARR-style repair is evaluated as the repair-and-
reverification stage described in Section III. Rejected an-
swers are rewritten using routed evidence or, when the
remaining content cannot be verified, replaced by a con-
servative non-claim response. Revised answers are then
scored by the same verifier.
We report a full-trace repair run and a targeted source-
conflation probe set. Each probe injects one deliberate
attribution error into otherwise captured benchmark ev-
idence: patient-record facts are attributed to literature,
or literature facts are attributed to the patient chart.
This isolates the failure mode that source-blind support
checks cannot measure.

9
H. Adjudication Status
The primary held-out labels are produced by two in-
dependent judge prompts run on a local Gemma 4 E4B
instruction-tuned model, followed by priority adjudica-
tion for disagreements, and the resulting labels are LLM-
assisted. Human expert review is limited to the final
361-label held-out packet used for the reported primary
evaluation. The separate multi-source benchmark uses
thegpt-5.4adjudication path described above and is re-
ported as a distinct benchmark rather than merged into
the primary held-out packet.
V. RESULTS
A. RQ1: Source-Aware Support Decisions
Finding.ProvenanceGuardpreserves source iden-
tity while making a conservative held-out support deci-
sion.
On the held-out split,ProvenanceGuardreaches
0.802 block F1 with block recall of 0.993 and block preci-
sion of 0.673. It also reports source accuracy of 0.858 and
source-plus-relation accuracy of 0.681 over 260 source-
eligible held-out claims. The low four-way verdict macro
F1 reflects the highly imbalanced held-out verdict distri-
bution and the rarity or absence of contradiction and
conflation labels in the random held-out split; binary
block F1 is the primary deployment metric. The trace-
bootstrap interval for block F1 is [0.664, 0.900], reflect-
ing the small 40-trace held-out split and claim clustering
within traces.
The mechanism is source preservation. Source-blind
baselines see pooled evidence and can estimate whether
a claim is supported somewhere, but they cannot tell
whether the answer assigned that claim to the correct
MCP source.ProvenanceGuardkeeps the routed
source ID attached to each claim, giving 0.858 source
accuracy over 260 source-eligible held-out claims and
0.681 source-plus-relation accuracy. This supports RQ1:
source-aware verification can match or improve support
detection while adding a provenance metric that source-
blind baselines cannot report.
The limitation is precision.ProvenanceGuard
trades precision for recall: its block precision is 0.673.
In data-sensitive review, this fail-closed operating point
is often appropriate, but deployments with high review
burden may choose a different threshold. This pattern is
consistent with prior factual-consistency systems: NLI-
style and support-checking methods are useful for de-
tecting unsupported text, but they do not solve source
ownership unless source identity is part of the decision.
B. Multi-Source Benchmark Rerun and Multi-Tool
Stress Slices
Finding.On the harder multi-source adjudicated
benchmark,ProvenanceGuardremains a strong con-
servative blocker but source-exact attribution is much
harder.
The locked test split contains 254 pairwise claim cases
expanded into 2,587 source-candidate rows. The frozen
extraction artifact for the same 59 questions contains
263 extracted claims, which are the unit scored by
theProvenanceGuardrouter+NLI rerun. On those
frozen extracted claims,ProvenanceGuardreaches
block F1 0.846, but source accuracy is 0.503 and source-
plus-relation accuracy is 0.229. This is the expected
direction for a benchmark with many same-topic can-
didates: binary blocking remains feasible, while exact
source ownership becomes substantially harder.
The stress-slice counts show that the new bench-
mark covers the failure modes missing from simpler two-
source traces. The test split includes 14 multi-tool claim
cases, 64 chart-plus-literature mixed cases, 14 literature-
summary versus exact-citation cases, 118 same-topic
wrong-patient/chart cases, and 240 count or resource-
summary cases. It also includes 42 cases with semanti-
cally close wrong candidates. These are the cases most
relevant to MCP provenance: the wrong source can be
topically plausible even when it is not the correct prove-
nance object.
The slice metrics show where exact provenance is
hardest.ProvenanceGuardretains high block F1
on chart-plus-literature and literature-citation slices, but
source-plus-relation accuracy falls to 0.127 on same-
topic wrong-chart or wrong-patient cases and 0.179 on
count/resource-summary claims. This suggests that
source-aware benchmarks should report both support
and provenance metrics: a conservative blocker can still
fail to identify the exact supporting provenance object.
The measured multi-source router+NLI rerun is fast
at the claim-packet level: mean NLI call latency is 0.036
seconds and mean routing latency per question group is
0.029 seconds. The table does not include claim decom-
position because the benchmark packet supplies frozen
claims.
Against the frozen independent extraction reference,
rule-based decomposition has high recall (0.935) but
lower precision (0.644), producing 382 claims for 263 ref-
erence claims. This is acceptable for a fail-closed verifier
because over-splitting tends to increase review burden
rather than silently allow unsupported content, but the
protected-value exact rate among value-bearing matches
is only 0.563. The paper therefore treats decomposition
as a measured limitation, not a solved preprocessing step.
The fresh answer-level rerun reconstructs full test-
question traces from the locked benchmark pairwise rows,
runs verification with rule-based decomposition, and en-
ables one repair iteration plus re-verification. The exter-
nal correction editor was unavailable in this local run, so

10
Split Claims Verdict acc. Verdict macro F1 Block P Block R Block F1 Source acc. Src+rel acc.
Train 1597 0.799 0.392 0.571 0.993 0.725 0.841 0.691
Validation 367 0.842 0.421 0.737 0.981 0.841 0.812 0.729
Held-out test 361 0.812 0.406 0.673 0.993 0.802 0.858 0.681
TABLE III. Prospective captured-agent trace claim-levelProvenanceGuardresults. Verdict macro F1 is macro F1 over
the four factual verdict labels: supported, unsupported, contradicted, and not-enough-evidence.ProvenanceGuardis the
retained RandomForest-calibrated Router+NLI verifier. Source accuracy and source-plus-relation accuracy are computed over
source-eligible claims; the held-out split has 260 source-eligible claims.
Split Questions Pairwise cases Pair rows Frozen claims Block F1 Source acc. Src+rel acc.
Train 539 3489 15248 – – – –
Validation 58 250 2603 – – – –
Test 59 254 2587 263 0.846 0.503 0.229
TABLE IV.ProvenanceGuardrerun on the locked multi-source adjudicated benchmark. Pairwise cases are the benchmark
claim cases; frozen claims are independently extracted answer claims from the same 59 test questions and are the unit scored
by the claim-level rerun.
the repair policy used its local fallbacks: 47 evidence-only
rewrites, 10 blocked-claim pruning repairs, and 2 termi-
nal conservative responses. All 59 reconstructed answers
are initially blocked, all 59 are handled by this repair
policy, and all 59 revised outputs pass the same verifier.
Mean elapsed time per answer is 0.498 seconds in this
local setup, with NLI and routing dominating the mea-
sured stage latencies.
C. RQ2: Ablation Studies
Finding.A direct raw verdict head substantially re-
duces the earlier calibration gap, while routing keeps the
correct source near the head of the source ranking.
The initial uncalibrated NLI-only support decision
reaches 0.750 block F1 and only 0.363 held-out verdict
accuracy, while the retained calibratedProvenance-
Guardrun reaches 0.802 block F1 and 0.812 verdict
accuracy. This 0.449 verdict-accuracy gap showed that
the naive raw label mapping was not semantically strong
enough. We therefore add a direct raw verdict head
trained on the train split over routed Router+NLI and
source-evidence features, without selecting a deployment
support threshold on validation. This raw verdict head
reaches 0.839 held-out verdict accuracy, 0.816 block F1,
and 0.704 source-plus-relation accuracy. Threshold cali-
bration on top of this raw head does not improve held-out
accuracy: the validation-F1 threshold gives 0.817 verdict
accuracy and 0.800 block F1, while a high-recall thresh-
old gives 0.795 verdict accuracy and 0.789 block F1 but
restores block recall to 0.993. The gap to the retained
calibrated verifier is therefore no longer a raw-accuracy
deficit; it is an operating-point tradeoff. Router-only
source ranking gives 0.858 Top-1 source accuracy. We
do not treat Top-3 or Top-5 as meaningful performance
metrics on this split because each source-eligible held-out
claim has at most two candidate sources.
The mechanism is that the naive raw NLI label loses
information that is present in evidence-derived features:
routing score, routing margin, lexical overlap, token sup-
port, and protected-value coverage. The direct raw ver-
dict head learns a verdict decision from those features
before any threshold calibration layer is applied. Cali-
bration is still useful for choosing a fail-closed operating
point, but it no longer needs to rescue a fundamentally
weak raw verdict mapping in this experiment. The cal-
ibrated support verdict also creates the precondition for
conflation detection: only after the verifier knows which
routed source supports the claim can it ask whether the
answer attributed that claim to the same provenance
family. Hard route-score cutoffs do not solve the prob-
lem: Table XV shows that increasingly strict cutoffs re-
ject most claims and reduce source accuracy among re-
tained source-eligible claims.
This confirms the RQ2 hypothesis in a bounded way.
Routing alone is necessary for attribution but does not
decide support; NLI alone estimates support but does not
preserve the source-ranking behavior needed for attribu-
tion; calibrated Router+NLI combines both. The limi-
tation is that this held-out split cannot evaluate large-k
source recall: Top-3 and Top-5 would be tautological be-
cause each claim has at most two candidate sources. A
larger trace set with more simultaneous MCP sources is
needed to measure whether top-krouting remains strong
under heavier source competition.
We then compare the retained verifier with develop-
ment variants that test alternative calibration and rout-
ing choices. The raw verdict head has the strongest
held-out verdict accuracy and block F1, whileProve-
nanceGuardis retained as the fail-closed deployment
point because it preserves the highest block recall among
the strong variants. Thresholding the raw head moves
it toward that conservative operating point but reduces
held-out accuracy and block F1. The evidence-calibrated
ExtraTrees/logistic blend and calibrated-score ensemble
improve some validation statistics, but in the held-out

11
Slice in locked test benchmark Pairwise claim cases
All claim cases 254
Multiple tool outputs present 14
Exactly one annotated best source among candidates 33
Semantically close wrong candidate present 42
Chart plus literature mixed cases 64
Literature summary versus exact citation cases 14
Same-topic but wrong patient/chart source cases 118
Count or resource-summary claims 240
TABLE V. Stress slices available in the locked multi-source adjudicated test benchmark, counted after grouping pairwise source-
candidate rows by claim case. Slice labels are non-exclusive diagnostics, so counts need not sum to the total number of claim
cases.
Slice Frozen claims Block F1 Source acc. Src+rel acc.
Chart + literature mixed 67 0.927 0.433 0.400
Literature summary vs exact citation 15 0.941 0.889 0.778
Same-topic wrong chart/patient 122 0.813 0.392 0.127
Count/resource-summary 59 0.800 0.692 0.179
TABLE VI.ProvenanceGuardperformance by multi-source stress slice on frozen extracted claims from the locked test
questions. Slice rows are small and are intended as diagnostics rather than powered subgroup estimates.
audit they reduce block recall and do not improve block
F1 relative to the retained system. We therefore report
both the raw verdict head as the strongest uncalibrated
verifier andProvenanceGuardas the retained conser-
vative verifier for RARR-style repair.
The multi-source benchmark comparison clarifies the
role of calibration. Calibration is useful when it tunes
an already meaningful score into an operating thresh-
old. It is not a substitute for a raw model that under-
stands source ownership. In the current post-finetune
benchmark package, the completed two-head backbones
already have much stronger raw source-plus-relation ac-
curacy than the legacy comparison rows: Long DeBERTa
and ModernBERT reach 0.478, and ModernCE reaches
0.420. Validation calibration changes the operating point
rather than uniformly improving every metric: block F1
increases slightly for the calibrated variants, while source-
plus-relation accuracy is unchanged or lower. This sup-
ports the design goal for future versions: improve the
base verifier so raw relation and source scores are sen-
sible, then use calibration only to choose a deployment
operating point.
After the original 20-epoch 2048-token ModernBERT
checkpoint proved unreadable, we trained a replacement
2048-token ModernBERT checkpoint for one bounded
100-group epoch and evaluated it raw on the full locked
multi-source test split. This is a diagnostic checkpoint
rather than a full finetune: case source-plus-relation ac-
curacy is 0.090, with source-pair accuracy 0.559. This
gives a valid long-context raw test point, but it does not
yet support the stronger claim that longer context alone
makes the raw verifier sensible.
The route-score diagnostic explains why a hard no-
source cutoff was not retained. Increasing the cutoff re-
jects most claims before NLI and reduces source accuracy
among the retained source-eligible claims, so route score
alone is too blunt for support decisions.
The blocked-case taxonomy explains where the sys-
tem spends its recall. On the held-out split, 176 blocked
claims are NLI-neutral or not-enough-evidence cases and
29 are wrong-route candidates. This is consistent with
the method design:ProvenanceGuardis primarily
rejecting claims that cannot be grounded in the routed
source, not only overt contradictions.
D. RQ3: Comparison With Source-Blind Baselines
Finding.Source-blind support baselines are compet-
itive on binary support, but they cannot evaluate MCP
source attribution.
The comparison table is therefore read only on the sup-
port axis.ProvenanceGuardhas the highest block
F1 at 0.802, followed by MiniCheck at 0.783 and RA-
GAS Faithfulness at 0.758. MiniCheck is close enough
that the 0.019 absolute F1 gap is not statistically sig-
nificant under paired trace-level bootstrap comparison
(one-sidedp≈0.13; two-sidedp≈0.26). The practical
difference is metric coverage: onlyProvenanceGuard
reports claim-to-source IDs, source accuracy, and source-
plus-relation accuracy.
The uncertainty estimates confirm that the support-
only advantage should not be overread.Provenance-
Guardreaches 0.802 block F1 with a 95% CI of [0.664,
0.900], MiniCheck reaches 0.783 [0.645, 0.882], and RA-
GAS Faithfulness reaches 0.758 [0.618, 0.861]. These in-
tervals overlap because the held-out split contains only
40 traces.
The mechanism is the distinction between pooled
support and provenance-sensitive support. MiniCheck
and RAGAS can determine whether evidence contains

12
Stage Count Mean s P50 s P95 s Max s
decide 263<0.001<0.001<0.001<0.001
group total 59 0.189 0.185 0.242 0.464
nli 263 0.036 0.034 0.049 0.117
router 59 0.029 0.027 0.039 0.093
TABLE VII. MeasuredProvenanceGuardclaim-packet stage latency on the locked multi-source test questions. The packet
provides frozen claims, so decomposition and repair are measured separately in Table X.
Strategy Questions Pred. claims Ref. claims Precision Recall F1 Value exact
Rule-based 59 382 263 0.644 0.935 0.763 0.563
TABLE VIII. Claim-decomposition agreement against the frozen independent sentence-level extraction reference on the locked
multi-source test questions. This is reference-set agreement, not a separate human gold span annotation.
enough information to support a claim, but their out-
put does not encode whether the supporting evidence
came from the patient chart, PubMed metadata, litera-
ture search, or another MCP source. This connects to the
paper’s main hypothesis: attribution requires preserving
source identity through routing and support checking.
The limitation is scope. The source-blind baselines are
not failed attribution systems; they are different tools.
They remain appropriate comparators for support esti-
mation, and their strong held-out F1 shows that pooled-
evidence support checking is a meaningful baseline. The
unexpected result is how close MiniCheck is on sup-
port F1, which suggests that the clearest contribution of
ProvenanceGuardis not a large binary F1 gain but
the ability to retain source ownership while maintaining
competitive support detection.
E. RQ4: Repair After Source-Aware Blocking
Finding.The repair loop can turn blocked captured-
trace answers into verifier-passing answers, but many re-
pairs require conservative fallback rather than a fully
rewritten substantive answer.
On 281 full captured traces, the pre-repair verifier al-
lows 108 answers and blocks 173. The repair loop resolves
all 173 blocked answers, and all 173 revised outputs pass
the same Router+NLI verifier. However, 144 of those
resolutions use a terminal conservative response. This
full-trace result should be separated from the targeted
source-conflation probe set in RQ5, where the controlled
probes are deliberately simpler.
The answer-level rerun in Table IX is a second re-
pair check on the multi-source benchmark rather than on
the original 281-trace corpus. It is stricter in the sense
that all reconstructed benchmark answers are initially
blocked, but it is also smaller and uses the same deter-
ministic rule-based runtime decomposition configuration
as the reported full-trace repair run.
The mechanism is fail-closed repair. The RARR-
style repair loop first attempts source-grounded rewrit-
ing, then reruns the verifier. If unsupported content re-
mains, the terminal fallback removes the remaining fac-
tual claim rather than allowing an unverifiable answer.
This supports the repair hypothesis only in the conserva-
tive sense: the loop can prevent unverifiable content from
passing, but it does not always recover a rich answer.
The limitation is that repair success is measured
against the same verifier that triggered the block. This
is appropriate for checking pipeline consistency, but it is
not independent proof that the revised answer is clini-
cally complete. Compared with prior RARR work, this
setting is stricter because revision must preserve MCP
source attribution, not only improve general factual con-
sistency against retrieved text.
F. RQ5: Targeted Source Conflation
Finding.ProvenanceGuarddetects and repairs
deliberately injected source-conflation errors in a con-
trolled clinical probe set.
In 50 clinically framed source-conflation probes, the
verifier blocks all 50 source-conflation replies and labels
all 50 as explicit conflations. The repair policy resolves
all 50 cases; all 50 pass post-repair verification, and no re-
vised answer retains the deliberately wrong attribution.
The exact binomial 95% interval for 50/50 successes is
approximately [0.93, 1.00]; the bootstrap interval is de-
generate on this fixed controlled probe set and should not
be read as a generalization interval.
The mechanism is the separation between support and
attribution. The factual content in these probes is of-
ten supported somewhere in the trace, but the answer
assigns it to the wrong provenance family. Source-blind
support checks cannot see that failure mode because the
claim may still be supported by pooled evidence.Prove-
nanceGuarddetects it by comparing stated attribution
with the routed supporting source.
This supports the source-conflation hypothesis for ex-
plicit attribution swaps. The limitation is difficulty: each
probe contains one clear source swap and no adversarial
attempt to hide the attribution error. The 1.000 result
should therefore be interpreted as a diagnostic check for a

13
Run Answers Initial blocks Repair resolved Revised allow Terminal fallback
Locked multi-source test 59 59 59 59 2
TABLE IX. Answer-levelProvenanceGuardrepair evaluation on reconstructed multi-source test traces. The conservative
repair policy resolved all initially blocked answers under re-verification; two required the terminal fallback response.
Answer-level stage Count Mean s P50 s P95 s Max s
conflation check 902<0.001<0.001<0.001<0.001
conflation route 117 0.027 0.025 0.041 0.070
decide 117<0.001<0.001<0.001<0.001
decompose 120<0.001<0.001<0.001 0.002
nli 451 0.039 0.036 0.063 0.220
router 117 0.036 0.026 0.074 0.468
TABLE X. Answer-level RARR-style repair rerun latency with rule-based decomposition, local embedding and NLI scoring,
one repair iteration, and post-repair re-verification.
constrained failure mode, not as evidence that all source-
conflation cases are solved.
G. Adjudication Status
Finding.The held-out evaluation uses complete
LLM-assisted labels with human expert review.
The held-out packet has labels for all 361 claims. The
agreement rows reflect two independent judge prompts
run on a local Gemma 4 E4B instruction-tuned model
and priority adjudication for disagreements. Human ex-
perts then reviewed the resulting held-out labels before
they were used for evaluation.
The mechanism is a two-stage adjudication workflow:
model judges provide first-pass labels, disagreements re-
ceive priority adjudication, and human experts verify the
final held-out labels. This supports reproducible bench-
marking while incorporating expert review after model
adjudication.
VI. DISCUSSION
The central result is not that attribution guarantees
truth. It does not. The contribution is that a verifier
for MCP-based agents can preserve source identity while
estimating support, making it possible to distinguish a
supported claim from a correctly attributed supported
claim. This distinction matters when one answer com-
bines patient-specific records, medical literature, and tool
metadata.
The empirical pattern is consistent across the held-
out results.ProvenanceGuardis competitive with
source-blind support baselines on binary blocking, but
its distinctive value is provenance: it returns claim-to-
source IDs and can detect source conflation. The gain is
most useful in offline or data-sensitive settings where a
conservative block is preferable to silently accepting an
answer whose facts are attached to the wrong source.
The multi-source rerun sharpens this interpretation.
On a larger pairwise source-candidate benchmark, binary
blocking remains strong, but exact source-plus-relation
accuracy drops sharply. This suggests that provenance
verification should be judged on two axes: support de-
tection and source ownership. A model that is useful
for blocking unsupported content is not necessarily good
enough for exact attribution when several semantically
close sources are present.
The calibration results also change the engineering les-
son. Calibration is useful for setting a fail-closed operat-
ing point, but it should not carry the core semantics of
the verifier. The initial raw Router+NLI label mapping
had exactly that weakness: it reached only 0.363 held-out
verdict accuracy, compared with 0.812 for the retained
calibrated verifier. A direct raw verdict head over routed
NLI and source-evidence features reduces this depen-
dence, reaching 0.839 held-out verdict accuracy without
a validation-selected support threshold. Threshold cali-
bration on top of this raw head does not improve held-out
accuracy; it shifts the system toward higher block recall.
With a high-recall threshold, the raw head reaches the
same 0.993 block recall asProvenanceGuardbut falls
to 0.795 verdict accuracy and 0.789 block F1. The re-
maining distinction is therefore an operating-point trade-
off rather than a raw semantic failure: the raw head has
higher verdict accuracy and block F1, while the retained
calibrated verifier has higher block recall at a better con-
servative operating point. The post-finetune multi-source
comparison reinforces this point: stronger raw two-head
backbones reach substantially higher source-plus-relation
accuracy before calibration, and calibration mainly ad-
justs the deployment threshold. Future work should
therefore prioritize stronger source-aware raw training
and harder negative candidates before adding more cal-
ibration machinery. The replacement 2048-token Mod-
ernBERT diagnostic run is loadable and evaluated, but
its low source-plus-relation accuracy leaves the longer-
context hypothesis unresolved rather than supported.
The repair results should be read with the same cau-

14
Condition Measured outcome Value
Router-only source ranking Top-1 source accuracy over source-eligible claims 0.858
NLI-only support decision Block F1 / block recall 0.750 / 0.993
Calibrated source-aware verifier Block F1 / block recall 0.802 / 0.993
Calibrated source-aware verifier Top-1 source accuracy over source-eligible claims 0.858
TABLE XI. Router ablation on the held-out claim split. Router-only reports whether the adjudicated source is ranked first
over the 260 source-eligible claims. NLI-only uses the routed NLI support decision without the calibrated evidence-feature
layer. The calibrated source-aware verifier is the retainedProvenanceGuardsystem. Top-3 and Top-5 are omitted because
the held-out source candidate sets are too small to make those cutoffs discriminative.
Variant Development objective Verdict acc. Block R Block F1 Source acc. Src+rel acc.
Uncalibrated source-aware verifier Initial source-aware verifier. 0.363 0.993 0.750 0.858 0.615
Route-threshold rerun Tested hard no-source filtering. 0.346 0.993 0.738 0.858 0.592
No-source top-kExplicit top-kno-source fallback. 0.729 0.993 0.738 0.858 0.481
Claim-relevant windows Restricted NLI premises to claim-relevant evidence. 0.421 0.942 0.771 0.862 0.673
Raw verdict head Direct train-split verdict head without threshold calibration. 0.839 0.928 0.816 0.858 0.704
Raw head + val threshold Validation-selected threshold on raw-head support probability. 0.817 0.950 0.800 0.858 0.688
Raw head + high-recall threshold Validation threshold constrained to block recall at least 0.99. 0.795 0.993 0.789 0.858 0.685
Evidence-calibrated blend ExtraTrees/logistic evidence-coverage calibration. 0.817 0.957 0.801 0.858 0.685
Calibrated-score ensemble Validation-selected blend of calibrated support scores. 0.809 0.957 0.794 0.858 0.681
ProvenanceGuard (ours) Retained RandomForest-calibrated source-aware verifier. 0.812 0.993 0.802 0.858 0.681
TABLE XII. Held-out results for source-aware verifier development runs. All rows are evaluated on the same 361-claim held-out
packet. Source metrics are computed on the 260 tool-source-eligible claims. The retained system is bolded.
tion. RARR-style repair plus reverification can remove
or correct unsupported content, and the targeted source-
conflation probes show that explicit attribution swaps are
detectable. But repair success against the same verifier
is not independent clinical validation, and conservative
fallbacks are evidence of fail-closed behavior rather than
rich answer recovery.
Offline benchmark claim-packet extraction and LLM-
assisted adjudication used a local Gemma 4 E4B
instruction-tuned model. Runtime answer-level verifica-
tion and repair used the deterministic rule-based decom-
poser. This is a deliberately conservative deployment
setting: it keeps the verifier compatible with offline and
data-sensitive environments. The framework itself is not
tied to that local model. More capable state-of-the-art
LLMs, including frontier Opus- or GPT-class systems,
may improve the LLM-dependent offline benchmark-
construction stages or repair rewriting. We treat this as
a generalization hypothesis rather than a reported result,
because the held-out numbers in this paper are only for
the frozen local-model configuration. The new decompo-
sition measurement also suggests where stronger runtime
decomposition could help: the rule-based decomposer re-
covers most frozen reference claims but over-splits and
preserves protected values imperfectly.
The main open question is scale. The primary held-out
split is small, confidence intervals are wide, and it cannot
meaningfully evaluate Top-3 or Top-5 source routing be-
cause the current traces usually expose only one or two
candidate sources per claim. The multi-source bench-
mark is a step toward this harder setting, but it also
shows that longer context and stronger source-aware raw
models are needed when the candidate set contains many
plausible near misses.
VII. CONCLUSION
We presentedProvenanceGuard, a source-aware
factuality verifier for MCP-based LLM agents. The pa-
per’s central claim is that factuality verification in multi-
tool settings must go beyond pooled evidence support:
it must also determine whether each claim is attributed
to the correct source. This distinction matters because a
claim can be supported somewhere in the available MCP
trace while still being misleadingly assigned to the wrong
tool output, patient record, literature source, or meta-
data source.
ProvenanceGuardpreserves stable MCP source
identifiers, decomposes answers into atomic claims,
routes claims to source-specific evidence, checks support
with NLI and alignment signals, and compares stated
attribution with the routed source. On a frozen cor-
pus of captured medical-domain MCP-agent traces, the
system achieved competitive blocking performance while
also producing claim-to-source attribution judgments un-
available from source-blind baselines. In targeted source-
conflation probes, it detected all deliberately injected at-
tribution swaps, demonstrating the value of source-aware
verification.
These results suggest that source attribution should be
treated as an independent evaluation axis for tool-using
LLM agents. However, the current evidence is limited by
the use of one medical agent stack, labels that are LLM-
assisted, a small held-out split, and controlled source-
conflation probes. Future work should expand evaluation
to larger, more diverse MCP environments and include
more subtle source-conflation cases.

15
System Stage Rel. acc. Source acc. Src+rel acc. Block F1 Verdict acc.
Legacy pairwise-package scorer diagnostic only; not retained system 0.496 0.472 0.212 0.869 0.249
Long DeBERTa raw 0.750 0.707 0.478 0.868 0.665
Long DeBERTa calibrated 0.750 0.688 0.478 0.874 0.657
ModernBERT raw 0.771 0.669 0.478 0.873 0.650
ModernBERT calibrated 0.750 0.656 0.459 0.875 0.661
ModernCE raw 0.681 0.675 0.420 0.814 0.626
ModernCE calibrated 0.670 0.586 0.382 0.850 0.598
TABLE XIII. Raw and validation-calibrated systems from the current post-finetune benchmark package on the locked multi-
source adjudicated benchmark. This table uses the package’s pairwise comparison units. The legacy pairwise-scorer row is a
diagnostic from the package and is not the retained frozen-claimProvenanceGuardpipeline; Table IV separately reports
that frozen extracted-claim rerun.
Model Max tokens Pair rows Status Case src+rel acc. Note
ModernBERT-base raw 2048 2587 complete 0.090 100-group 1-epoch
TABLE XIV. Raw longer-context diagnostic using a 2048-token ModernBERT checkpoint trained for one bounded 100-group
epoch.
VIII. LIMITATIONS
The trace benchmark is drawn from one medical MCP-
agent stack. It is representative of that stack, but it
does not establish universal medical factuality or clinical
safety validation.
The reproducible object is the frozen trace, not future
behavior of PubMed, FHIR resources, search tools, or the
live agent. Tool outputs and agent behavior may vary if
the same prompts are rerun at a later date.
The 2,325-label claim subset uses LLM-assisted adjudi-
cation with two independent judge prompts and priority
adjudication for disagreements. Human expert verifica-
tion covers only the 361 held-out labels used in the re-
ported primary evaluation; it does not cover training or
validation labels and does not establish universal medical
factuality or clinical safety validation. The benchmark
should therefore not be interpreted as a fully clinician-
adjudicated training corpus.
The claim-level bootstrap intervals are wide because
the held-out split contains only 40 traces and claims are
clustered within traces. Reported uncertainty therefore
uses trace-level resampling rather than treating all 361
claims as independent.
The held-out labels are dominated by supported and
not-enough-evidence claims. There are few explicit con-
tradictions and no gold conflation relation in the ran-
dom held-out claim split. The targeted 50-case source-
conflation probe set is therefore the most direct evidence
for controlled conflation detection and repair, while the
random 281-trace run evaluates full-answer behavior. Be-
cause the 50 probes are generated by injecting one ex-
plicit source-attribution swap into otherwise captured
benchmark evidence, the 1.000 repair metrics do not im-
ply that the task is solved under harder, multi-error,
paraphrased, or adversarial source-conflation conditions.
The paper reports claim-decomposition agreement
against a frozen independent extraction artifact, not
against a separately human-authored gold atomic-claim
set. This makes the decomposition numbers useful for
regression testing and error analysis, but not a final esti-
mate of human gold extraction precision and recall. De-
composition errors can still affect answer-level behavior,
especially protected-value preservation, so this remains
an evaluation gap.
The initial raw Router+NLI label mapping depended
heavily on calibration for final verdict accuracy. On
the main held-out split, the naive raw verdict accu-
racy is 0.363 and the retained calibrated verifier reaches
0.812. The direct raw verdict head reduces this gap
by reaching 0.839 verdict accuracy without validation-
threshold calibration, but it is still trained on split-
specific Router+NLI and source-evidence features rather
than being an end-to-end source-aware NLI model.
Threshold calibration on top of the raw head shows the
expected recall–accuracy tradeoff rather than an addi-
tional held-out accuracy gain: the high-recall operating
point reaches 0.993 block recall but falls to 0.795 ver-
dict accuracy. This improves the reported calibration-
dependence story, while leaving robustness under distri-
bution shift as an evaluation gap.
The 2048-token raw ModernBERT result uses a re-
placement one-epoch checkpoint trained for only 100
sampled groups after the original longer run was not
available for evaluation. This is enough to verify the
evaluation path and report a valid raw long-context test
point, but it is not a full training run. We therefore do
not claim that longer context improved raw source-aware
verification.
External source-blind support baselines are not source-
attribution systems. They are appropriate binary de-
cision comparators where configured, but they are not
baselines for claim-to-source accuracy.
The LLM-dependent components are also a valid-
ity boundary. The reported configuration uses a local
Gemma 4 E4B instruction-tuned model for offline bench-

16
Cutoff Kept Rejected Source acc. kept
0.100 314 47 0.847
0.200 191 170 0.787
0.300 89 272 0.684
0.400 39 322 0.533
0.500 9 352 0.400
0.600 2 359 0.000
0.700 1 360 0.000
0.800 0 361 –
TABLE XV. Held-out route-score threshold diagnostic. A hard no-source cutoff rejects low-score claims before NLI. Higher
cutoffs reject most claims and reduce source accuracy among retained source-eligible claims, so this policy was not retained.
Source accuracy is undefined when no claims are retained.
Split Blocked NLI/NEE Wrong route Contradiction No source Other
Train 741 592 149 0 0 0
Validation 205 167 38 0 0 0
Held-out test 205 176 29 0 0 0
TABLE XVI. Blocked prediction taxonomy forProvenanceGuardon prospective captured-agent traces.
mark claim-packet extraction and adjudication where
LLM calls are required. Runtime answer-level ver-
ification and repair use deterministic decomposition.
Stronger frontier LLMs may produce cleaner offline claim
packets, more stable adjudications, or richer repairs, but
those systems are not evaluated in the reported frozen
run.
IX. REPRODUCIBILITY
The reproducible unit is the frozen MCP trace and its
derived claim-level evaluation packet. Each reported ta-
ble is generated from stored traces, claim packets, LLM-
assisted labels, prediction files, baseline outputs, uncer-
tainty resamples, and repair outputs. The artifact re-
lease preserves the raw tool outputs and stable source
identifiers needed to rerun source routing and attribu-
tion checks.
The implementation used for the reported run instan-
tiates Section III as follows. Source routing uses the
all-MiniLM-L6-v2 SentenceTransformer model with co-
sine similarity over normalized embeddings. Support
checking uses Moritz Laurer’s DeBERTa-v3-base check-
point fine-tuned on MNLI, FEVER, and ANLI. Of-
fline benchmark claim-packet extraction and the two
model-adjudication passes use a local Gemma 4 E4B
instruction-tuned model; runtime answer-level verifica-
tion and repair use the deterministic rule-based de-
composer. The multi-source adjudication path uses
thegpt-5.4API model identifier, and the local judge
prompts use the deployed Gemma 4 E4B instruction-
tuned checkpoint, recorded asgemma-4-e4b-itwhere
the deployment exposes model IDs; model documenta-
tion and local model-card checks were accessed on 2026-
06-16. The calibrated support layer is trained on the
development split, and its threshold is selected on vali-
dation before held-out scoring.
The NLI scorer truncates premise–claim pairs at a con-
figurable token budget. The current default is 512 tokens
through the NLI maximum-length setting; the prior 256-
token setting is retained only in historical backbone arti-
facts that were run under local MPS memory constraints.
New joint-verifier training and scoring runs default to 512
tokens unless a model-specific longer-context run over-
rides the argument. The 2048-token ModernBERT raw
evaluation and replacement checkpoint are included in
the released artifact bundle.
The full-trace repair outputs are stored separately from
claim-level outputs because they evaluate answer-level
behavior rather than isolated claim predictions. Exter-
nal baselines are stored as source-blind support outputs
and are not used to train or calibrateProvenance-
Guard. Historical rerun summaries are not used for
the manuscript numbers. The reconstructed multi-source
answer-level traces, fresh answer-level RARR-style out-
puts, summary, and latency files are stored together in
the released artifact bundle.
The raw verdict-head results and threshold-calibration
variants are stored underartifacts/router_nli_raw_
verdict_head/. The multi-source benchmark tables are
generated from frozen benchmark artifacts and copied
into the paper artifact bundle. The associated answer-
trace reconstruction, claim-decomposition measurement,
and long-context raw-evaluation outputs are preserved
with the same released artifacts.
[1] S. Min, K. Krishna, X. Lyu, M. Lewis, W.-t. Yih, P. W.
Koh, M. Iyyer, L. Zettlemoyer, and H. Hajishirzi, inPro-
ceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in

17
System Claims Block P Block R Block F1 Verdict acc. Verdict macro F1
ProvenanceGuard (ours) 361 0.673 0.993 0.802 0.812 0.406
MiniCheck 361 0.655 0.971 0.783 0.792 0.396
RAGAS Faithfulness 361 0.660 0.892 0.758 0.781 0.390
AlignScore 361 0.510 0.942 0.662 0.629 0.313
SummaC-ZS 361 0.433 0.439 0.436 0.562 0.270
TABLE XVII. Held-out captured-agent trace claim-level factuality comparison. Verdict macro F1 is macro F1 over the
four factual verdict labels: supported, unsupported, contradicted, and not-enough-evidence.ProvenanceGuarduses only
router, NLI, and evidence-derived features. MiniCheck, RAGAS Faithfulness, AlignScore, and SummaC-ZS are source-blind
claim/evidence support baselines and therefore are not scored on claim-to-source attribution.
Quantity Point estimate 95% CI
ProvenanceGuard (ours) block F1 0.802 [0.664, 0.900]
MiniCheck block F1 0.783 [0.645, 0.882]
RAGAS Faithfulness block F1 0.758 [0.618, 0.861]
AlignScore block F1 0.662 [0.498, 0.778]
SummaC-ZS block F1 0.436 [0.287, 0.555]
ProvenanceGuard (ours) source accuracy 0.858 [0.731, 0.963]
Conflation-probe repair resolution rate 1.000 [0.93, 1.00]
Post-repair pass among resolved probes 1.000 [0.93, 1.00]
TABLE XVIII. Uncertainty estimates for held-out claim-level
metrics and targeted repair. Claim-level intervals use 5,000
trace-level bootstrap resamples over the 40 held-out traces.
Repair intervals for 50/50 probe successes use an exact bino-
mial 95% interval rounded to two decimals because case-level
bootstrap resampling is degenerate on the fixed controlled
probe set.ProvenanceGuardsource accuracy is computed
over 260 source-eligible held-out claims.
Rows Pre allow Pre block Repair resolved Terminal fallback Revised allow
281 108 173 173 144 173
TABLE XIX. Full captured-trace RARR-style repair results
on 281 captured MCP-agent traces. Rejected answers enter
the repair loop and are then re-scored by the same source-
router plus NLI verifier. Terminal fallback means the remain-
ing unverified content was replaced with a conservative non-
claim response.
Rows Pre block Explicit confl. Repair resolved Terminal fallback Post allow Wrong attr. retained
50 50 50 50 11 50 0
TABLE XX. Targeted clinically framed source-conflation
probe set over frozen captured MCP evidence. The 50 probes
contain one deliberate source-attribution error each; post-
repair verification uses the same source-router plus NLI veri-
fier.
Item Count
Held-out claims in adjudication packet 361
LLM-assisted labeled claims 361
Model-assisted agreement rows 350
Priority-adjudicated disagreements 11
Human expert reviewed held-out labels 361
TABLE XXI. Held-out adjudication status. Labels come from
two independent judge prompts run on a local Gemma 4 E4B
instruction-tuned model, priority adjudication for disagree-
ments, and human expert review of the resulting 361 held-out
labels. This table does not claim human review of the training
or validation labels; exact model identifiers and access dates
are reported in Section IX.
Natural Language Processing(2023).
[2] L. Tang, P. Laban, and G. Durrett, inProceedings of the
2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing(Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, Miami, Florida, USA, 2024) pp. 8818–8847.
[3] P. Laban, T. Schnabel, P. N. Bennett, and M. A. Hearst,
SummaC: Re-visiting nli-based models for inconsistency
detection in summarization (2021), arXiv:2111.09525.
[4] Y. Zha, Y. Yang, R. Li, and Z. Hu, inProceedings of
the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics(Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, Toronto, Canada, 2023) pp. 11328–11348.
[5] Y. Song, Y. Kim, and M. Iyyer, inFindings of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP(2024).
[6] T. Goyal and G. Durrett, inFindings of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020(2020).
[7] A. Cattan, P. Roit, S. Zhang, D. Wan, R. Aharoni,
I. Szpektor, M. Bansal, and I. Dagan, Transactions of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (2026).
[8] S. Harary, E. Hirsch, A. Slobodkin, D. Wan, M. Bansal,
and I. Dagan, PrefixNLI: Detecting factual inconsisten-
cies as soon as they arise (2025), arXiv:2511.01359.
[9] S. Es, J. James, L. Espinosa-Anke, and S. Schockaert,
inProceedings of the 18th Conference of the European
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics: System Demonstrations(Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, St. Julian’s, Malta, 2024) pp. 150–158.
[10] T. Gao, H. Yen, J. Yu, and D. Chen, inProceedings of
the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP)(Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, Singapore, 2023) pp. 10355–10377.
[11] B. Bohnet, V. Q. Tran, P. Verga, R. Aharoni, D. Andor,
L. B. Soares, M. Ciaramita, J. Eisenstein, K. Ganchev,
J. Herzig, K. Hui, T. Kwiatkowski, J. Ma, J. Ni,
L. Sestorain Saralegui, T. Schuster, W. W. Cohen,
M. Collins, D. Das, D. Metzler, S. Petrov, and K. Web-
ster, Attributed question answering: Evaluation and
modeling for attributed large language models (2022),
arXiv:2212.08037.
[12] X. Yue, B. Wang, Z. Chen, K. Zhang, Y. Su, and H. Sun,
inFindings of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: EMNLP 2023(Association for Computational
Linguistics, Singapore, 2023) pp. 4615–4635.
[13] H. Rashkin, V. Nikolaev, M. Lamm, L. Aroyo, M. Collins,
D. Das, S. Petrov, G. S. Tomar, I. Turc, and D. Reitter,
Computational Linguistics49, 777 (2023).
[14] O. Honovich, R. Aharoni, J. Herzig, H. Taitelbaum,
D. Kukliansy, V. Cohen, T. Scialom, I. Szpektor, A. Has-
sidim, and Y. Matias, inProceedings of the 2022 Confer-
ence of the North American Chapter of the Association

18
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies (NAACL)(Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, Seattle, United States, 2022) pp. 3905–3920.
[15] E. Hirsch, A. Slobodkin, D. Wan, E. Stengel-Eskin,
M. Bansal, and I. Dagan, inProceedings of the 63rd An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics(2025) pp. 15355–15370.
[16] D. Wan, E. Hirsch, E. Stengel-Eskin, I. Dagan, and
M. Bansal, GenerationPrograms: Fine-grained attribu-
tion with executable programs (2025), arXiv:2506.14580.
[17] J. Gao, J. Zhou, Q. Sun, R. Huang, and S. Yoo, Atomic
information flow: A network flow model for tool attribu-
tions in RAG systems (2026), arXiv:2602.04912.
[18] Q. Zhang, Z. Xiang, Y. Xiao, L. Wang, J. Li, X. Wang,
and J. Su, inProceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics(2025).
[19] S. Filice, E. Haramaty, G. Horowitz, Z. Karnin, L. Lewin-
Eytan, and A. Shtoff, inProceedings of the 14th Interna-
tional Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing
and the 4th Conference of the Asia-Pacific Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics(2025) pp.
1017–1037.
[20] L. Gao, Z. Dai, P. Pasupat, A. Chen, A. T. Chaganty,
Y. Fan, V. Y. Zhao, N. Lao, H. Lee, D.-C. Juan, and
K. Guu, inProceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume
1: Long Papers)(Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, Toronto, Canada, 2023) pp. 16477–16508.
[21] P. Roit, J. Ferret, L. Shani, R. Aharoni, G. Cideron,
R. Dadashi, M. Geist, S. Girgin, L. Hussenot, O. Keller,
N. Momchev, S. Ramos Garea, P. Stanczyk, N. Vieillard,
O. Bachem, G. Elidan, A. Hassidim, O. Pietquin, and
I. Szpektor, inProceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume
1: Long Papers)(Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, Toronto, Canada, 2023) pp. 6252–6272.
[22] W. Kry´ sci´ nski, B. McCann, C. Xiong, and R. Socher, in
Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP)(Association
for Computational Linguistics, 2020) pp. 9332–9346.
[23] I. Poey, J. Liu, and Q. Zhong, inProceedings of the 2025
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing: Industry Track(2025) pp. 1057–1071.
[24] ThoughtProof, Reasoning verification capability — veri-
fying ai output correctness through MCP, MCP GitHub
Discussion #2574 (2026).

19
Appendix A: Illustrative Escaped JSON Schema Fragments
{
"question_id": "clin-real-v2-shuf-003",
"user_question": "Summarize beta blockers in heart failure with atrial fibrillation.",
"category": "literature_review",
"route": "pubmed_research",
"tool_calls": [
"search_pubmed_key_words",
"get_pubmed_article_metadata"
],
"full_tool_outputs": [
{
"tool_name": "get_pubmed_article_metadata",
"source_id": "tool_output::get_pubmed_article_metadata",
"source_role": "complete_tool_output",
"chunk_count": 3,
"text": "Complete tool output for get_pubmed_article_metadata.\\n[1] ..."
},
{
"tool_name": "search_pubmed_key_words",
"source_id": "tool_output::search_pubmed_key_words",
"source_role": "complete_tool_output",
"chunk_count": 12,
"text": "Complete tool output for search_pubmed_key_words.\\n[1] ..."
}
],
"original_evidence_chunk_count": 15,
"assistant_answer": "A source-grounded answer summarizing the literature...",
"final_reply_to_user": "A source-grounded answer summarizing the literature...",
"elapsed_s": 19.97
}
Appendix B: Random-Forest Calibration Input and Output
{
"claim_id": "clin-real-v2-shuf-014::c01",
"candidate_claim": "The patient is Carla Mendoza.",
"routed_source": {
"source_id": "tool_output::load_patient_history",
"tool_name": "load_patient_history",
"route_score": 0.224,
"routing_margin": 0.224
},
"calibrator_input": {
"categorical_features": {
"verifier_label": "entailment",
"category": "chart_plus_literature",
"pred_tool": "load_patient_history",
"status": "routed_entailment"
},
"numeric_features": {
"route_score": 0.224,
"pred_score": 0.927,
"routing_margin": 0.224,
"term_overlap": 1.000,
"all_term_overlap": 1.000,
"claim_terms_n": 3,
"protected_n": 1,
"protected_missing": 0,
"protected_missing_all": 0,
"evidence_chunks_n": 4,
"claim_len": 5,
"has_stated_attr": 0,
"score_x_route": 0.208,
"score_x_overlap": 0.927,
"route_x_overlap": 0.224,
"neutral": 0,
"entailment": 1,
"contradiction": 0,
"weak_route_high_score": 0,
"strong_route": 0,
"score_x_route_squared": 0.043
}
},
"calibrator": {
"model": "RandomForestClassifier",
"n_estimators": 400,
"max_depth": 5,
"min_samples_leaf": 8,

20
"class_weight": "balanced",
"threshold": 0.650
},
"calibrator_output": {
"support_probability": 0.9996,
"support_decision": "supported",
"pred_relation": "entailment",
"pred_source_id": "tool_output::load_patient_history",
"pred_tool_id": "load_patient_history"
},
"downstream_use": {
"support_passes_to_attribution_matching": true,
"answer_level_policy": "block if any claim fails support or attribution"
}
}
Appendix C: Escaped Claim, Routing, NLI, and Repair Example
{
"trace_evidence": {
"tool_name": "load_patient_history",
"source_id": "tool_output::load_patient_history",
"text": "id: bench-6; name: Felipe Costa; label: Asthma; status: active."
},
"atomic_claim": {
"text": "Felipe Costa (bench-6) has active condition Asthma",
"stated_attribution": "According to PubMed evidence."
},
"routing": {
"routed_source_id": "tool_output::load_patient_history",
"tool_name": "load_patient_history",
"score": 0.637,
"margin": 0.413
},
"nli": {
"relation": "entailment",
"protected_values": ["bench-6"],
"unsupported_content_token_indices": []
},
"attribution": {
"status": "conflation",
"reason": "Supported by patient-history evidence, not PubMed evidence."
},
"rarr": {
"status": "corrected",
"replacement": "Patient history: Felipe Costa (bench-6) has active Asthma."
}
}