2026-06-09
SciOrch: Learning to Orchestrate Expert
LLMs for Solving Frontier Multimodal
Scientific Reasoning Tasks
Jingru Guo1, Xiangyuan Xue2, Lian Zhang3, Wanghan Xu4,5, Siki Chen6,
Philip Torr6, Wanli Ouyang2,5,7, Lei Bai5†, Zhenfei Yin6†
1Imperial College London 2The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 4Shanghai Jiao Tong University
5Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 6University of Oxford 7Shenzhen Loop Area Institute
/envel⌢pejingru.guo25@imperial.ac.uk†Corresponding authors.
/githubhttps://github.com/llexieguo/SciOrch
AbstractFrontier scientific reasoning remains a major challenge for large language models (LLMs),
where even the strongest commercial systems fall short of expert-level performance. A closer look at
modelbehaviorrevealssubstantialcomplementaritythatsingle-modelevaluationhides: differentfrontier
models excel on different question types, and no single model captures the full picture. We present
SciOrch, a framework that trains a lightweight 8B model to orchestrate frontier LLMs for scientific
reasoning. The orchestrator decomposes each question, delegates sub-problems to selected commercial
models through API calls, and synthesizes a final answer. Training such an orchestrator is fundamentally
harder than conventional agentic RL: each action triggers an API call that is expensive in both dollar cost
and latency, making standard online rollouts infeasible. We address this with MCTS-based approach,
producing diverse orchestration trajectories, extracting per-node single-turn samples, and optimizing
the orchestrator with GRPO-style training. On a 240-question test set spanning SGI-Reasoning and
Scientists’ First Exam, SciOrch reaches 56.66% average accuracy, outperforming the strongest single
commercial model by 3.74% and the strongest multi-agent baseline by 3.33%. It also attains the best
accuracy on both SGI and SFE with less than half the API cost of typical multi-agent methods.
1. Introduction
Multimodal scientific reasoning is one of the most demanding tasks for large language models (LLMs)
because of the urgent need for accelerating scientific discovery. It requires interpreting experimental
figures, integrating knowledge across sub-fields, and reaching conclusions that an experienced
researcher would accept. However, even the most powerful LLMs cannot reliably solve those frontier
problems. SGI-Reasoning, a subset of multimodal reasoning tasks from the recent SGI-Bench [Xu
et al., 2025], captures this setting. On the frontier tasks involving nine disciplines ranging from
astronomy to material science, even the strongest commercial model, Gemini-3-Pro [Google, 2025],
reaches only 42% accuracy on this task.
Yet this ceiling masks a more nuanced picture. We evaluate a broad range of frontier models on
SGI-Reasoning and find substantial disagreement among their correct answers (Figure 1): combining
justthreemodels(Gemini-3-Pro, Gemini-2.5-Pro[Comanicietal.,2025], andGPT-4o[OpenAI,2024])
already covers 74% of the test set, almost double the best single-model accuracy, and expanding the
pool to all evaluated models pushes the union to 89%. This 89% is an oracle upper bound, since it
assumes per-instance knowledge of which model is correct, but it shows how much capability already
exists in the current model pool.
Different models also lead on different disciplines: Claude-Sonnet-4 [Anthropic, 2025a] ranks first on
arXiv:2606.15872v1  [cs.CL]  14 Jun 2026

SciOrch: Learning to Orchestrate Expert LLMs for Solving Frontier Multimodal Scientific Reasoning Tasks
Astronomy, o4-mini [OpenAI, 2025] on Earth Science and Physics, and Gemini-3-Pro on Life Science.
The complementarity is not only across questions. A typical SGI-Reasoning question mixes figure
parsing, domain-specific recall, and quantitative reasoning, and these sub-tasks do not always favor
the same model: one model may read a plot more reliably while another handles the underlying
mechanism better. The headroom therefore comes not from building a stronger individual model, but
from combining existing ones at a granularity finer than whole-question dispatch.
Figure 1 | Complementarity among frontier LLMs
on SGI-Reasoning.Top: oracle accuracy when pool-
ing the top-𝑁 frontier models.Bottom: per-domain
accuracy and oracle envelopes for the best three
and all models.
Existing approaches to exploiting model diver-
sity fall into two families, each with structural
limitations. Prompt-based multi-agent methods
(Figure 2a) such as self-consistency [Wang et al.,
2023b]andmulti-agentdebate[Duetal.,2024]
aggregate multiple reasoning paths, but their
protocols are static: cost grows linearly with
the number of paths while accuracy gains satu-
rate quickly, and the same procedure is applied
regardless of question difficulty, discipline, or
model strengths. Routing-based methods (Fig-
ure 2b), such as prompt-to-leaderboard [Frick
et al., 2025], train a router to dispatch each
query to a single pre-selected model, but the
decision is committed once and cannot adapt to
intermediate evidence or decompose the query
across models. A separate line of work intro-
ducesorchestration[Ruan et al., 2026, Su et al.,
2025, Zhang et al., 2026a], where a orches-
trator learns to decompose a query and route
its sub-problems across models. This fits the
within-question complementarity, but existing
methods target general tool use and have never
been extended to frontier scientific reasoning.
Inspired by orchestration-based methods, we proposeSciOrch(Figure 2c), a framework that trains
a lightweight 8B vision-language model (VLM) to orchestrate frontier commercial models. The
orchestrator treats commercial model APIs as tools in its action space. At each step it chooses
between two actions: delegate a sub-problem to a specified model, or submit a final answer. This
formulation turns long-context multimodal reasoning into a multi-step decision problem. To achieve
learning, reinforcement learning (RL) is the most intuitive way, but it is extremely diffcult in this
case for two reasons: (i) every action triggers a real API call, which makes large-scale rollouts
expensive; and (ii) each call adds non-trivial latency, which makes standard online RL prohibitively
slow. To achieve a balance between this performance-efficiency trade-off, we integrate Monte Carlo
Tree Search (MCTS) [Browne et al., 2012, Wu et al., 2025] in our training. It rollouts diverse
orchestration trajectories, from which we extract per-node single-turn samples and update the model
with REINFORCE++ [Hu et al., 2025]. In this way, a single rollout yields much more training samples
within the same cost of API call. The gradient phase runs offline on sufficient pre-collected samples,
significantly improving the training efficiency while introducing acceptable data staleness.
Empirically, SciOrch turns this complementarity into measurable gains. On the 240-question test
set, it achieves the best accuracy on both evaluation slices, with 49.30% on SGI-Reasoning [Xu et al.,
2025] and 68.10% on Scientists’ First Exam [Zhou et al., 2025], yielding 56.66% average accuracy.
This improves over the strongest standalone commercial model, Gemini-3-Pro, by 3.74%, and over
2

SciOrch: Learning to Orchestrate Expert LLMs for Solving Frontier Multimodal Scientific Reasoning Tasks
Multi-agent debate
User query
Agent1
Agent2
Agent3
Answer A
Answer B
Answer C
ExchangeConsensusAnswer
(c) SciOrch(our): Adaptive cross-model orchestration
Self-consistency
User query
Single agent
Answer AAnswer BAnswer CMajorityVoteFinal Answer
Same model, same blind spots, diverse paths but homogeneous knowledge
Fixed rounds regardless of difficulty linear cost, quick saturation
Re-ans. A
Re-ans. B
Re-ans. C
Repeat x rounds
Orchestrater
Based on these images, what is the most significant operational challenge ……
Action: delegate / Type: vision reasoning / Model: gemini-2.5-proReasoning: the question requires ……Instruction: Analyze Figure b to estimate the accuracy of ….. 
Action: delegate / Type: CALCULATION / Model: claude-haiku-4-5-20251001Reasoning: The previous steps established that …….Instruction:Identify the gene with the highest …… 
Action: submitReasoning: the evidence ofprior steps confirms …… 
The heatmap indicates intermittent generation ……
Capacity factor = 1,825 / (500 × 8,760) = 41.7% …… 
Cost-efficient multi-step reasoning — targeted decomposition, early stopping when confidentLearned selective routing — adapts strategy to question difficulty and model expertise
(b) Routing-based method
(a) Prompt-based multi-agent methods
User query
RouterModel
Prompt-specific routingMath problem”Solve this integal step by step”Selected Model
o1Creative writing”Write a short story about a time traveler”Selected Model
Gemini-3-pro
Code generation”Write a funciton to parse a JSON file”Selected Model
Claude-sonnet-4.5Same model, same blind spotsFixed rounds regardless of difficulty
Figure 2 | Comparison of multi-agent reasoning paradigms.(a)Prompt-based methods such as
self-consistency and multi-agent debate apply a fixed protocol regardless of question difficulty, with
their cost growing linearly and accuracy saturating quickly.(b)Routing-based methods send each
query to a single pre-selected model based on prompt features, but the router can neither revise its
choice after seeing intermediate evidence, nor decompose the query into sub-problems handled by
different models.(c) SciOrchtrains a lightweight orchestrator to decompose each question, delegate
sub-problems to the most suitable commercial model, and submit a final answer once evidence is
sufficient, enabling adaptive cross-model orchestration with selective routing and early stopping.
the strongest prompt-based multi-agent baseline by 3.33%. The improvement is not simply purchased
with more API calls: SciOrch costs only $10.42 over the full test set, which is much lower than the
best self-consistency baselines. To sum up, the core contributions of our work are three-fold:
1. We propose SciOrch, an orchestration framework for frontier scientific reasoning that frames the
task as a multi-step decision problem, where a lightweight agent learns to delegate sub-problems
to frontier models.
2. We introcue an MCTS-based method that makes RL tractable in the orchestration setting, where
tree search generates sufficient, diverse trajectories, and offline gradient updates decouple
training from API latency.
3. Experimentsona240-questiontestsetacrossninescientificdisciplinesdemonstratethatSciOrch
surpasses the strongest commercial model at substantially lower inference cost.
2. Related Work
2.1. Benchmarks for Scientific Reasoning
Early benchmarks for scientific reasoning covered broad academic knowledge through multiple-
choice questions and are now largely saturated by frontier models [Clark et al., 2018, Hendrycks
et al., 2021, Welbl et al., 2017]. Later benchmarks raised the difficulty bar with graduate-level
evaluations that resist shallow retrieval, on which even the strongest reasoning models reach only 50
3

SciOrch: Learning to Orchestrate Expert LLMs for Solving Frontier Multimodal Scientific Reasoning Tasks
to 60 percent accuracy [Feng et al., 2024, Huang et al., 2024, M-A-P Team et al., 2025, Rein et al.,
2024]. As vision-language models matured, a new generation of multimodal scientific benchmarks
emerged to test the interpretation of figures, diagrams, and experimental data [He et al., 2024, Lu
et al., 2022, Wang et al., 2024b, Yue et al., 2024, 2025a, Zhou et al., 2025]. Among these, frontier
multimodal scientific reasoning, where each question requires interpreting real experimental figures
across multiple disciplines, remains the hardest, and is the setting we target through SGI-Bench.
2.2. LLM-based Multi-agent Reasoning
A growing body of work tries to push past the limits of any single model by combining multiple
models or multiple reasoning paths [Guo et al., 2024, Li et al., 2024, Tran et al., 2025]. Prompt-
based methods aggregate sampled reasoning paths through majority voting, debate, or structured
collaboration [Chan et al., 2024, Liang et al., 2024, Qian et al., 2025, Wang et al., 2024a, Wei et al.,
2022]; their protocols are fixed, inference cost grows linearly with the number of paths, and accuracy
gains saturate quickly. A second line of work trains a router that dispatches each query to a single
model from a pool, trading off answer quality against inference cost [Chen et al., 2023, 2024, Ding
et al., 2024, Feng et al., 2025a,b, Frick et al., 2025, Yue et al., 2025b, Zhang et al., 2026b], but
the decision is made upfront from the prompt alone and cannot adapt to intermediate evidence or
decompose the query across models. A more recent direction trains a small orchestrator to delegate
stronger models or tools over multiple steps [Hu et al., 2024, Ruan et al., 2026, Shang et al., 2024,
Su et al., 2025, Zhang et al., 2024a,b, 2026a, Zhuge et al., 2024], typically via RL under verifiable
rewards [DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025, Shao et al., 2024], sometimes combined with tree search. Most of
this work targets general tool use or open-ended agentic tasks, while our setting is different, since
each action triggers an expensive commercial API call rather than a cheap forward pass.
2.3. Agents for Scientific Discovery
A separate line of research, often grouped under AI for Science, builds domain-specialized systems
that act as scientific agents [AI4Science and Quantum, 2023, Miret and Krishnan, 2024, Wang et al.,
2023a]. Some systems train predictive models for specific scientific tasks, such as protein structure,
materials, and chemistry [Abramson et al., 2024, Baek et al., 2021, Jumper et al., 2021, Merchant
et al., 2023, Szymanski et al., 2023]. Others pair LLMs with search or evolutionary procedures to
discover algorithms, equations, or mathematical constructions [Novikov et al., 2025, Romera-Paredes
et al., 2024, Schmidt and Lipson, 2009], and a third group builds full agentic pipelines that walk
through hypothesis generation, experimental design, literature review, and wet-lab validation [Boiko
et al., 2023, Bran et al., 2024, Gottweis et al., 2025, Lu et al., 2024]. These systems lean on domain-
specific modules and target the full scientific process. Our work is complementary: we focus on
the general reasoning step that almost any such pipeline ultimately depends on, by training a small
orchestrator that combines the strengths of frontier LLMs on multimodal scientific reasoning.
3. Method
3.1. Orchestration Architecture
We frame multimodal scientific reasoning tasks as a multi-step decision problem. Given a multimodal
question (𝐼, 𝑞) with a set of images𝐼={𝑖 1, . . . , 𝑖𝑛} of variable size 𝑛≥ 0and a text query 𝑞, an
orchestrator𝜋 𝜃 interacts with a pool of commercial models accessed through APIs:
M={𝑚 1, 𝑚2, . . .}.(1)
4

SciOrch: Learning to Orchestrate Expert LLMs for Solving Frontier Multimodal Scientific Reasoning Tasks
(b) Phase1: diverse rollout(c) Phase2: Signal-driven expansion
(d) Phase3: pruning
Root𝑠!=𝐼,𝑞,∅
𝑎""𝑎#"𝑎$"𝑎%"𝑎"#𝑎##𝑎$#𝑎%#
Sematic space
Farthest point
𝑎"" 𝑎##
Root𝑠!=𝐼,𝑞,∅score(v)=∆Q(v)-0.5)depth(v)
Eachturnselect the node with highest scoreExpand until the tree reach N leaves
S=-0.5S=0.16
S=-1S=0
S=-0.5S=-0.5
Keep K children – maximize expected return
Modelpool1Modelpool2
(2) Rollout until all paths terminate
(a) Step-level Action                                    State𝑠&
Image𝑖&
Question𝑞&
Historyℎ&=𝑚',𝑞',𝑟''()
Orchestrator𝜋!Qwen3-VL-8B
DelegateSubmit{”type”: “delegate”,“model”: “gpt-4o”,”task_type”: “vision_reasoning”,“instruction” : “Analyze …”}
{”type”: “submit”,“answer”: “B”,”reason”: “…”,}
Each node- one action
(1)
Figure 3 | Three-phase MCTS for orchestrator training.(a) Step-level action.At each step, the
orchestrator 𝜋𝜃 takes the current state𝑠𝑡 =(𝐼, 𝑞 𝑡, ℎ𝑡) and emits one JSON-formatted action, either
adelegateto a commercial model or asubmitof the final answer. Each node in the MCTS tree
corresponds to one such action.(b) Phase 1: diverse rollout.Build a binary tree in two steps:
(1) at each node, two prompts with different model pools each sample𝑛 candidate actions, and
the pair with the largest sentence-embedding cosine distance over the action text is selected as the
two children; (2) rollout from each leaf continues until all paths terminate.(c) Phase 2: signal-
driven expansion.Grow the tree to𝑁 leaves by repeatedly expanding the node with the highest
score(𝑣)=Δ𝑄(𝑣) −𝑐·depth(𝑣) .(d) Phase 3: pruning.Keep at most𝐾 children per parent, chosen
to maximize the parent’s expected return.
The orchestrator is a lightweight vision-language model that breaks each question into sub-problems,
sends each sub-problem to a chosen model inM, and writes a final answer from the responses it
collects. Figure 2(c) shows the full process.
At step𝑡, the state contains the original question together with what has happened so far:
𝑠𝑡 =(𝐼, 𝑞, ℎ 𝑡), ℎ 𝑡 ={(𝑚 𝑖, 𝑞𝑖, 𝑟𝑖)} 𝑖<𝑡 ,(2)
where ℎ𝑡 stores every previous delegation: which model was called, what sub-question was sent, and
what response came back. Conditioned on𝑠𝑡, the orchestrator emits a single action in a JSON-like
format. The action space is:
A=A delegate ∪ {𝑎submit}.(3)
A delegate action specifies the target model𝑚∈ M and an instruction𝑞′ that phrases the sub-question,
along with a sub-task tag drawn from {calculation,sci-reasoning,vision-reasoning}. The
selected model returns a textual response𝑟 via its API, and the resulting tuple(𝑚, 𝑞′, 𝑟) is appended
to ℎ𝑡. A submit action carries the final answer𝑎 and ends the episode. Outputs are constrained by
structured prompting, and malformed actions are rejected during sampling. Figure 3a illustrates this
step-level action structure with concrete JSON examples for both action types.
Thepool M containsdiversefrontiermodelswithcomplementarystrengths. Theorchestratorcommits
to a single model per delegation instead of querying every model in parallel, so it has to learn from
5

SciOrch: Learning to Orchestrate Expert LLMs for Solving Frontier Multimodal Scientific Reasoning Tasks
experience which model is good at which kind of sub-question. This is what makes the system selective
routing rather than exhaustive ensembling.
3.2. Monte Carlo Tree Search
Training such an orchestrator with standard online RL is impractical since each rollout requires
API calls. If we adopt classical online RL, the training cost and latency will explode. Therefore, we
adopt MCTS to generate diverse trajectories within each iteration, so that a single tree yields many
state-action samples by sharing the cost of common prefixes across branches. As shown in Figure 3,
our MCTS runs in three phases:diverse strategy rollout,signal-driven expansion, andpruning.
Tree structure.Multiple trajectories sampled from a task form a treeG. Each node𝑣 in the treeG
corresponds to a state𝑠𝑣. Edges represent actions sampled from the current policy𝜋𝜃. The root is the
initial state 𝑠0 =(𝐼, 𝑞,∅) , and each leaf is either a submit node or a node that reaches the step budget.
Phase 1: diverse rollout.Starting from the root, we construct each node’s two children in two steps
(Figure 3b).(1)Candidate generation.We issue two prompts to the orchestrator, each exposing a
different subset of the model pool, so that the candidate actions cover distinct routing options at the
source. Each prompt samples𝑛 candidate actions, yielding𝑚 candidates in total.(2)Farthest-pair
selection.From these 𝑚 candidates, we select the pair with the largest sentence-embedding cosine
distance over the action text, and use them as the two children of𝑣. The two steps target diversity at
different stages, generation and selection, and together produce an initial tree whose siblings tend to
disagree on routing choices. We continue rolling out from each leaf until all paths terminate.
Phase 2: signal-driven expansion.Previous works have shown that GRPO-style [Shao et al., 2024]
methods benefit from states where different actions yield clearly different returns: the larger the
return gap across siblings, the stronger the relative-advantage signal driving policy updates. We
thereforeintroduceasignal-drivenstrategythatenrichessuchinformativestatesuntilthetreecontains
𝑁leaves (Figure 3c). At each expansion step, we select the node𝑣that maximizes:
score(𝑣)=Δ𝑄(𝑣) −𝑐·depth(𝑣),(4)
where𝑐is a depth-penalty coefficient andΔ𝑄(𝑣)is the return gap among the children of𝑣:
Δ𝑄(𝑣)=max
𝑣′ ∈children(𝑣)
𝑄(𝑣 ′) −min
𝑣′ ∈children(𝑣)
𝑄(𝑣 ′),(5)
and 𝑄(𝑣 ′)=𝔼 𝜏∼𝑣′ [𝑅(𝜏)] is the empirical expected return at𝑣′. Parents with large Δ𝑄 carry the
strongest training signal, while the depth penalty discourages overly deep, narrow branches and
keeps the tree balanced. The selected node is then expanded with the same procedure as in Phase 1.
Phase3: Pruning.Phase2mayattachmanychildrentoasingleparent,andsomeofthesechildrencan
be redundant: they either share the same routing decision in different wording or fall into degenerate
all-correct or all-wrong sibling groups, neither of which produces useful gradients (Figure 3d). For
any node with more than𝐾 children, we keep a subset of size𝐾 chosen to maximize the parent’s
expected return:
C∗(𝑣)=arg max
C ⊆children(𝑣),| C |=𝐾
1
|C|
∑︁
𝑣′ ∈ C
𝑄(𝑣 ′).(6)
3.3. Step-Level Training
A straightforward use of MCTS data is to treat each root-to-leaf trajectory as one sample and apply
trajectory-level policy gradients. We find this unstable in practice: trajectories sharing a common
6

SciOrch: Learning to Orchestrate Expert LLMs for Solving Frontier Multimodal Scientific Reasoning Tasks
prefix receive different returns based on later decisions, so the same early action appears in samples
with conflicting rewards, leading to noisy gradients.
We instead train onindividual nodesunder a non-cumulative setting. For each non-leaf node𝑣 in the
tree G, we form a single-turn training sample(𝑠 𝑣, 𝑎𝑣, 𝑅𝑣), where 𝑎𝑣 is the action taken from𝑣 and 𝑅𝑣
is the empirical return signal extracted from MCTS. We define𝑅𝑣 as the value of the child reached by
𝑎𝑣, baselined against the average value of all explored siblings:
𝑅𝑣 =𝑄(𝑣 child) −𝑉(𝑣),(7)
where𝑄(𝑣 child)=𝔼 𝜏∼𝑣child [𝑅(𝜏)]is the empirical expected return at the child, and𝑉(𝑣)= 1
|children(𝑣) |Í
𝑣′ ∈children(𝑣) 𝑄(𝑣 ′) servesasabaselinecomputedoversiblingsexploredunderMCTS.Thisdecomposes
the trajectory-level signal into per-step credit, with each sample reflecting how much the chosen action
improves over the average alternative. Samples collected across all training questions in iteration𝑡
form an on-policy training batchT𝑡 that drives the policy update.
Policy optimization.Many recent RL methods for LLMs adopt GRPO and its variants, which rely
on multiple rollouts from a single prompt to estimate group-relative advantages. In our setting, the
relevant “group” is the set of sibling actions explored at the same MCTS node, and𝑅𝑣 already encodes
the within-group relative return. We therefore adopt REINFORCE++, which is naturally compatible
with this per-node formulation.
For each sample(𝑠 𝑣, 𝑎𝑣, 𝑅𝑣) ∈ T𝑡, we compute a token-level advantage by combining the node-level
return with a per-token KL penalty against a fixed reference policy𝜋ref:
𝐴(ℓ)
𝑣 =𝑅 𝑣 −𝛽
|𝑎 𝑣 |∑︁
𝑗=ℓ
log 𝜋𝜃𝑡 (𝑎 (𝑗)
𝑣 |𝑠 𝑣, 𝑎(< 𝑗)
𝑣 )
𝜋ref(𝑎 (𝑗)
𝑣 |𝑠 𝑣, 𝑎(< 𝑗)
𝑣 )
,(8)
where 𝑎(ℓ)
𝑣 denotes the ℓ-th token of the action,|𝑎 𝑣| is the action length in tokens, and𝛽 controls the
strength of the KL constraint. The reference policy𝜋ref is fixed to the initial checkpoint and prevents
the orchestrator from drifting too far from a sensible language model. To stabilize updates across
nodes with different return scales, we normalize advantages across the batch:
ˆ𝐴(ℓ)
𝑣 = 𝐴(ℓ)
𝑣 −Mean({𝐴 (ℓ)
𝑣 })
Std({𝐴 (ℓ)
𝑣 }) +𝜖
.(9)
Surrogate objective.For each sample, let
𝜌(ℓ)
𝑣 (𝜃𝑡)= 𝜋𝜃𝑡 (𝑎 (ℓ)
𝑣 |𝑠 𝑣, 𝑎(<ℓ)
𝑣 )
𝜋𝜃old (𝑎 (ℓ)
𝑣 |𝑠 𝑣, 𝑎(<ℓ)
𝑣 )
(10)
denote the per-token importance-sampling ratio, where𝜋𝜃old is the policy used to collectT𝑡. We
optimize𝜋 𝜃𝑡 with a clipped surrogate objective in the style of PPO, applied at the token level:
J (𝜃𝑡)=𝔼 T𝑡
" |𝑎 𝑣 |∑︁
ℓ=1
min

𝜌(ℓ)
𝑣 ˆ𝐴(ℓ)
𝑣 ,clip(𝜌 (ℓ)
𝑣 ,1−𝜖,1+𝜖) ˆ𝐴(ℓ)
𝑣
#
.(11)
The clipping constrains each update to remain within a trusted region around𝜋𝜃old, which is critical
for stability when training on samples that mix correct and incorrect API responses.
Iterative training.Each iteration 𝑡 consists of three phases: (1) collect an on-policy batchT𝑡 by
running three-phase MCTS under the current policy𝜋𝜃𝑡 over a set of training questions; (2) compute
7

SciOrch: Learning to Orchestrate Expert LLMs for Solving Frontier Multimodal Scientific Reasoning Tasks
Algorithm 1Training Process of SciOrch.
Require:Initial policy𝜋 𝜃0, training setD, model poolM, iterations𝑇
Ensure:Trained orchestrator𝜋 𝜃𝑇
1:for𝑡=0,1, . . . , 𝑇−1do
// Sampling phase
2:Sample a batch{(𝐼 𝑖, 𝑞𝑖, 𝑎∗
𝑖 )} 𝐵
𝑖=1 ∼ D;T ← ∅
3:foreach(𝐼 𝑖, 𝑞𝑖, 𝑎∗
𝑖 )in the batchdo
4:G 𝑖 ←MCTS(𝐼 𝑖, 𝑞𝑖, 𝑎∗
𝑖 ;𝜋 𝜃𝑡 ,M)
5:foreach non-leaf node𝑣∈ G 𝑖 do
6: ˆ𝐴𝑣 ←𝑄(𝑣 child) −𝑉(𝑣);T ← T ∪ {(𝑠 𝑣, 𝑎𝑣, ˆ𝐴𝑣)}
7:end for
8:end for
// Update phase
9: ˜𝐴𝑣 ← ( ˆ𝐴𝑣 −𝜇 T)/𝜎 T for all𝑣∈ T
10:L (𝜃 𝑡) ← − 1
| T |
Í
𝑣∈ T ˜𝐴𝑣 log𝜋 𝜃𝑡 (𝑎 𝑣 |𝑠 𝑣);𝜃 𝑡+1 ←𝜃 𝑡 −𝜂∇ 𝜃𝑡 L (𝜃𝑡)
11:end for
per-token advantages 𝐴(ℓ)
𝑣 with the KL penalty and normalize them acrossT𝑡; (3) update𝜃 on the
clipped surrogate J (𝜃𝑡). The updated checkpoint becomes the policy for the next iteration’s MCTS
sampling, keeping the procedure on-policy while amortizing API cost across many per-node samples.
Algorithm 1 summarizes the full procedure.
4. Experiments
4.1. Dataset Construction
We construct a training and test split that combines SGI-Reasoning [Xu et al., 2025], our primary
evaluation benchmark, with Scientists’ First Exam [Zhou et al., 2025] as a difficulty- and modality-
matched augmentation source.
SGI subset (145 train / 146 test).SGI-Reasoning contains 291 questions. We stratify by discipline
and split into 145 training and 146 held-out test questions. The training subset preserves the discipline
distribution of the full benchmark.
SFE subset (31 train / 94 test).SFE contains 830 bilingual visual question-answering items. We
choose SFE as the augmentation source for four reasons: (1) it is natively English with real scientific
image; (2) its difficulty matches SGI-Reasoning with the o3 model [OpenAI, 2025] reaching about
34% accuracy on SFE, comparable to the 42% reached by Gemini-3-Pro [Google, 2025] on SGI-
Reasoning; (3) it shares the multimodal modality and scientific-figure framing of SGI; and (4) it does
not contain training-contamination canaries.
We apply a three-step filter to extract usable samples. First, we keep only English multiple-choice
items, yielding 281 candidates. Second, we apply a quality gating step. Each candidate is evaluated
by five frontier models, including GPT-5.4 [OpenAI, 2026], GPT-4o [OpenAI, 2024], Gemini-3-Pro,
Gemini-2.5-Pro [Comanici et al., 2025], and Claude-Sonnet-4.5 [Anthropic, 2025b]). A sample is
retained if at least one model answers correctly. This filter removes items that no frontier model
can solve, which are overwhelmingly mislabeled or ambiguous rather than genuinely hard. The
resulting pool matches SGI in difficulty without truncating its upper tail. Third, we sample stratified
by discipline to fill the test quota first and assign the remaining items to the training set.
8

SciOrch: Learning to Orchestrate Expert LLMs for Solving Frontier Multimodal Scientific Reasoning Tasks
Resulting split.Table 1 reports the discipline composition of the final 176-question training set (145
SGI + 31 SFE) and 240-question test set (146 SGI + 94 SFE). The training set preserves the discipline
weights of SGI-Reasoning, with SFE augmentation concentrated in the five disciplines it covers. The
test set spans all nine SGI disciplines, and the four disciplines not covered by SFE are evaluated solely
on SGI, while the other draw from both sources.
Discipline SGI SFE Total
Astronomy 8/9 9/18 17/27
Chemistry 4/7 9/18 13/25
Earth Sci. 28/26 9/18 37/44
Energy 7/3 – 7/3
Information 8/12 – 8/12
Life Sci. 43/42 4/28 47/70
Material 17/21 0/12 17/33
Neuroscience 13/11 – 13/11
Physics 17/15 – 17/15
Total145/146 31/94 176/240
Table 1| Dataset composition by discipline and source (train/test). SFE covers five disciplines with
real scientific images; “–” indicates the discipline is not covered by SFE, in which case both training
and testing use SGI.
Baselines.We compare SciOrch against four categories of baselines on the 240-question test set.
(1)Frontier models.We involve GPT-5.4, Gemini-3-Pro, and Claude-Sonnet-4.5, each prompted on
the full multimodal input(𝐼, 𝑞). (2)Multi-agent methods.We involve self-consistency [Wang et al.,
2023b], which majority-votes over multiple CoT samples, and multi-agent debate [Du et al., 2024],
where models exchange and revise answers over fixed rounds. (3)Routing-based methods.We involve
prompt-to-leaderboard (P2L) [Frick et al., 2025], which predicts per-query Bradley-Terry win rates
and selects the top model. We use the public P2L-1.5B checkpoint with its output head restricted to
our model pool. (4)Training-based methods.We conduct SFT [Ouyang et al., 2022] and GRPO [Shao
et al., 2024] on the Qwen3-VL-8B-Instruct model [Bai et al., 2025] under the same training set,
isolating the contribution of SciOrch’s orchestration with RL-based training.
4.2. Implementation Details
Orchestrator and model pool.We consistently use Qwen3-VL-8B-Instruct [Bai et al., 2025] as the
orchestrator 𝜋𝜃, with a model poolM of 16 commercial endpoints spanning three families: OpenAI
(GPT-5.4, GPT-5.2, GPT-5, GPT-5-mini, GPT-4.1, GPT-4.1-mini, GPT-4o, GPT-4o-mini, o3), Anthropic
(Claude-Sonnet-4.5, Claude-Sonnet-4, Claude-Haiku-4.5), and Google (Gemini-3-Pro, Gemini-3-Flash,
Gemini-2.5-Pro, Gemini-2.5-Flash). The pool deliberately mixes flagship and lighter variants so that
the orchestrator can also learn to trade off accuracy against cost.
MCTS sampling.Each Phase 1 prompt samples𝑛= 4candidate actions, so 𝑚= 2𝑛= 8per node.
Phase 2 expands until the tree contains𝑁= 64leaves. Phase 3 caps each parent at𝐾= 8children.
The depth-penalty coefficient is𝑐=0.5.
Training.We implement SciOrch with the MS-Swift framework [Zhao et al., 2025], using its
REINFORCE++ [Hu et al., 2025] implementation as the policy optimizer. We train for𝑇 iterations
on the 176-question training set; each iteration generates an on-policy batch via three-phase MCTS
and updates the orchestrator on the clipped surrogate objective. The orchestrator is fine-tuned with
9

SciOrch: Learning to Orchestrate Expert LLMs for Solving Frontier Multimodal Scientific Reasoning Tasks
Method SGI SFE Average Cost
GPT-5.4
Vanilla 40.41 67.02 50.83 4.18
Consistency 45.21 60.64 51.25 24.73
Debate 39.73 62.77 48.75 13.22
Claude-Sonnet-4.5
Vanilla 31.51 48.94 38.33 3.14
Consistency 39.04 57.45 46.25 19.33
Debate 40.41 52.13 45.00 21.72
Gemini-3-Pro
Vanilla 46.58 62.77 52.92 5.97
Consistency 45.89 64.89 53.33 14.36
Debate 45.89 64.89 53.33 17.65
Qwen3-VL-8B
Vanilla 24.70 31.90 27.52 -
Consistency 22.60 43.62 30.83 -
Debate 21.23 44.68 30.42 -
SFT 26.00 39.40 31.24 -
GRPO 19.60 41.30 29.10 -
P2L 32.17 57.50 37.70 5.39
SciOrch (Ours) 49.30 68.10 56.66 10.42
Table 2| Main results on the 240-question test set (accuracy%). Three frontier models and Qwen3-
VL-8B are evaluated under vanilla prompting, self-consistency, and multi-agent debate. We also report
SFT and GRPO on Qwen3-VL-8B as training-based methods and P2L as a routing-based method.
SciOrch uses Qwen3-VL-8B as an orchestrator with access to a pool of frontier models. Average is the
weighted mean over 146 SGI and 94 SFE questions. Cost is the total API spend in USD.
AdamW at a low learning rate of 1e-6, with a small KL loss and a PPO-style clip. All the training runs
on 8 NVIDIA H100 GPUs, but the wall-clock time is dominated by API latency.
Evaluation.We report exact-match accuracy on three test slices, i.e., SGI, SFE, and the combined
240-question test set, along with API cost.
4.3. Main Results
Table 2 summarizes our findings. The open-source Qwen3-VL-8B substantially trails every frontier
model in its vanilla form with a poor average accuracy of 27.52%. Continued training does not close
this gap: SFT and GRPO yield only performance gains of 3.72% and 1.58% over the vanilla form, still
well below every frontier baseline. The picture is consistent across slices: on SGI the post-trained
Qwen3-VL-8B reaches at most 26.00% accuracy, and on SFE it tops out at 44.68% accuracy. A stronger
standalone open-source model is therefore not a viable path on this benchmark.
Test-timescalingonthefrontiermodelsthemselvesalsofailstoclosethegap. Self-consistencyimproves
GPT-5.4 by only 0.42% and multi-agent debate even degrades it by 2.08%, while inflating API spend
by 5 times. Claude-Sonnet-4.5 plateaus at 45.00% under both methods. Across all three frontier
models, no one dominates both slices: GPT-5.4 leads on SFE with an accuracy of 67.02% but trails
Gemini-3-Pro on SGI. Prompt-based methods on any one model cannot recover the complementary
10

SciOrch: Learning to Orchestrate Expert LLMs for Solving Frontier Multimodal Scientific Reasoning Tasks
capabilities held by the others. The routing baseline further confirms this from the other direction:
off-the-shelf preference-trained routers stay well below any individual frontier model.
SciOrch addresses both limitations. An 8B orchestrator learns to dynamically dispatch among a pool
of frontier models and attains the highest score on both slices simultaneously, achieving 49.30%
accuracy on SGI and 68.10% accuracy on SFE. The average accuracy of 56.66% is 5.41% above the
strongest baseline and 5.83% above the strongest vanilla model. The gain is also disproportionate to
the cost: SciOrch spends $10.42 across the 240-question test set, which is less than half of the cost of
self-consistency based on GPT-5.4, while consistently delivering much better average accuracy.
5. Conclusion
In this work, we present SciOrch, a framework that trains a lightweight model to orchestrate expert
modelsforchallengingmultimodalscientificreasoning. Byformulatingthetaskasamulti-stepdecision
problem where each action is an API call, we cast frontier scientific reasoning as a routing problem and
exploit the cross-model complementarity that single-model evaluation hides. To make the RL-based
learning process tractable under the per-action API costs, we propose step-level MCTS-based training,
which generates diverse trajectories through tree search and extracts per-node training signals for
applying REINFORCE++. Experiments on a 240-question test set show that SciOrch surpasses the
strongest single commercial model at lower inference cost. We hope this work motivates further study
of learnable orchestration as a complementary direction for frontier scientific reasoning.
6. Limitations
Evaluation scale.Our test set contains 240 questions across nine scientific disciplines. While this is
comparable to other frontier scientific reasoning benchmarks at the same difficulty level, the absolute
size is modest, and individual per-discipline cells are small. As a result, we cannot conclusively verify
how well SciOrch generalizes beyond the evaluated distribution, and per-discipline trends should be
read as suggestive rather than definitive. Larger-scale evaluation, especially on out-of-distribution
scientific tasks, remains future work.
Multiple-choice format.Our training and evaluation are restricted to multiple-choice questions,
where exact-match correctness against the ground-truth answer provides a clean verifiable reward.
This is a meaningful gap from the open-ended nature of real scientific practice, where an AI scientist
would need to generate hypotheses, write free-form derivations, and produce arguments that can only
be judged for partial correctness or semantic equivalence. Extending SciOrch to free-form scientific
reasoning may require a reliable reward model.
7. Ethical Considerations
Potential misuse.SciOrch lowers the cost of producing competitive scientific answers by routing a
lightweight 8B orchestrator across frontier commercial APIs. While this makes scientific reasoning
capability more accessible to under-resourced research groups, the same property could be exploited
by bad actors. The risk is amplified by the fact that the orchestrator runs only the routing logic, not
the underlying frontier weights, which should be released for the system to be reproduced. We urge
practitioners deploying orchestration-style systems to combine them with output-side safeguards
rather than relying on the cost barrier alone.
Modelhallucination.SciOrch’s answer is synthesized from responses returned by commercial models,
each of which is known to hallucinate, especially on frontier scientific questions where ground truth
11

SciOrch: Learning to Orchestrate Expert LLMs for Solving Frontier Multimodal Scientific Reasoning Tasks
is scarce in pretraining data. Our orchestrator does not verify the factual content of any individual
API response. It routes and aggregates rather than fact-checks. As a result, the system can confidently
produce answers that are well-formatted, internally coherent, and yet factually wrong, in ways that
may be harder to detect than the obvious errors a single weaker model would make. SciOrch’s answer
should be treated as candidate reasoning to be verified, not as substitutes for primary literature or
experimental evidence.
References
Josh Abramson, Jonas Adler, Jack Dunger, Richard Evans, Tim Green, Alexander Pritzel, Olaf Ron-
neberger, LindsayWillmore, AndrewJ.Ballard, JoshuaBambrick, etal. Accuratestructureprediction
of biomolecular interactions with AlphaFold 3.Nature, 2024.
Microsoft Research AI4Science and Microsoft Azure Quantum. The impact of large language models
on scientific discovery: a preliminary study using GPT-4.arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.07361, 2023.
Anthropic. Introducing claude 4, 2025a. URLhttps://www.anthropic.com/news/claude-4.
Anthropic. Introducing claude sonnet 4.5, 2025b. URLhttps://www.anthropic.com/news/c
laude-sonnet-4-5.
Minkyung Baek, Frank DiMaio, Ivan Anishchenko, Justas Dauparas, Sergey Ovchinnikov, Gyu Rie
Lee, Jue Wang, Qian Cong, Lisa N. Kinch, R. Dustin Schaeffer, et al. Accurate prediction of protein
structures and interactions using a three-track neural network.Science, 2021.
Shuai Bai et al. Qwen3-VL technical report.arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.21631, 2025.
Daniil A. Boiko, Robert MacKnight, Ben Kline, and Gabe Gomes. Autonomous chemical research with
large language models.Nature, 2023.
Andres M. Bran, Sam Cox, Oliver Schilter, Carlo Baldassari, Andrew D. White, and Philippe Schwaller.
Augmenting large language models with chemistry tools.Nature Machine Intelligence, 2024.
Cameron B. Browne, Edward Powley, Daniel Whitehouse, Simon M. Lucas, Peter I. Cowling, Philipp
Rohlfshagen, Stephen Tavener, Diego Perez, Spyridon Samothrakis, and Simon Colton. A survey of
monte carlo tree search methods.IEEE Transactions on Computational Intelligence and AI in Games,
2012.
Chi-Min Chan, Weize Chen, Yusheng Su, Jianxuan Yu, Wei Xue, Shanghang Zhang, Jie Fu, and
Zhiyuan Liu. ChatEval: Towards better LLM-based evaluators through multi-agent debate. In
International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2024.
Lingjiao Chen, Matei Zaharia, and James Zou. FrugalGPT: How to use large language models while
reducing cost and improving performance.arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.05176, 2023.
Shuhao Chen, Weisen Jiang, Baijiong Lin, James T. Kwok, and Yu Zhang. RouterDC: Query-based
router by dual contrastive learning for assembling large language models. InAdvances in Neural
Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2024.
Peter Clark, Isaac Cowhey, Oren Etzioni, Tushar Khot, Ashish Sabharwal, Carissa Schoenick, and
Oyvind Tafjord. Think you have solved question answering? Try ARC, the AI2 reasoning challenge.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.05457, 2018.
12

SciOrch: Learning to Orchestrate Expert LLMs for Solving Frontier Multimodal Scientific Reasoning Tasks
Gheorghe Comanici, Eric Bieber, Mike Schaekermann, Ice Pasupat, Noveen Sachdeva, Inderjit Dhillon,
Marcel Blistein, Ori Ram, Dan Zhang, Evan Rosen, et al. Gemini 2.5: Pushing the frontier with
advanced reasoning, multimodality, long context, and next generation agentic capabilities.arXiv
preprint arXiv:2507.06261, 2025.
DeepSeek-AI et al. DeepSeek-R1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in LLMs via reinforcement
learning.arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12948, 2025.
Dujian Ding, Ankur Mallick, Chi Wang, Robert Sim, Subhabrata Mukherjee, Victor Ruhle, Laks V. S.
Lakshmanan, and Ahmed Hassan Awadallah. Hybrid LLM: Cost-efficient and quality-aware query
routing. InInternational Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2024.
Yilun Du, Shuang Li, Antonio Torralba, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, and Igor Mordatch. Improving
factuality and reasoning in language models through multiagent debate. InProceedings of the 41st
International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2024.
Kehua Feng, Xinyi Shen, Weijie Wang, Xiang Zhuang, Yuqi Tang, Qiang Zhang, and Keyan Ding.
SciKnowEval: Evaluating multi-level scientific knowledge of large language models.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.09098, 2024.
Tao Feng, Yanzhen Shen, and Jiaxuan You. GraphRouter: A graph-based router for LLM selections. In
International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2025a.
TaoFeng,HaozhenZhang,ZijieLei,HaodongYue,ChongshanLin,GeLiu,andJiaxuanYou. Llmrouter:
An open-source library for llm routing, 2025b. URLhttps://github.com/ulab-uiuc/LLMR
outer.
Evan Frick, Connor Chen, Joseph Tennyson, Tianle Li, Wei-Lin Chiang, Anastasios N Angelopoulos,
and Ion Stoica. Prompt-to-leaderboard.arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.14855, 2025.
Google. A new era of intelligence with Gemini 3, 2025. URLhttps://blog.google/products
-and-platforms/products/gemini/gemini-3.
Juraj Gottweis, Wei-Hung Weng, Alexander Daryin, Tao Tu, Anil Palepu, Petar Sirkovic, Artiom
Myaskovsky, Felix Weissenberger, Keran Rong, Ryutaro Tanno, et al. Towards an AI co-scientist.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.18864, 2025.
Taicheng Guo, Xiuying Chen, Yaqi Wang, Ruidi Chang, Shichao Pei, Nitesh V. Chawla, Olaf Wiest, and
Xiangliang Zhang. Large language model based multi-agents: A survey of progress and challenges.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.01680, 2024.
Chaoqun He, Renjie Luo, Yuzhuo Bai, Shengding Hu, Zhen Leng Thai, Junhao Shen, Jinyi Hu, Xu Han,
Yujie Huang, Yuxiang Zhang, et al. OlympiadBench: A challenging benchmark for promoting AGI
with olympiad-level bilingual multimodal scientific problems. InAnnual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (ACL), 2024.
Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andy Zou, Mantas Mazeika, Dawn Song, and Jacob
Steinhardt. Measuring massive multitask language understanding.Proceedings of the International
Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2021.
Jian Hu, Jason Klein Liu, Haotian Xu, and Wei Shen. REINFORCE++: A simple and efficient approach
for aligning large language models.arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.03262, 2025.
Shengran Hu, Cong Lu, and Jeff Clune. Automated design of agentic systems.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2408.08435, 2024.
13

SciOrch: Learning to Orchestrate Expert LLMs for Solving Frontier Multimodal Scientific Reasoning Tasks
Zhen Huang, Zengzhi Wang, Shijie Xia, Xuefeng Li, Haoyang Zou, Ruijie Xu, Run-Ze Fan, Lyumanshan
Ye, Ethan Chern, Yixin Ye, et al. OlympicArena: Benchmarking multi-discipline cognitive reasoning
for superintelligent AI. InAdvances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2024.
John Jumper, Richard Evans, Alexander Pritzel, Tim Green, Michael Figurnov, Olaf Ronneberger,
Kathryn Tunyasuvunakool, Russ Bates, Augustin Žídek, Anna Potapenko, et al. Highly accurate
protein structure prediction with AlphaFold.Nature, 2021.
Xinyi Li, Sai Wang, Siqi Zeng, Yu Wu, and Yi Yang. A survey on LLM-based multi-agent systems:
Workflow, infrastructure, and challenges.Vicinagearth, 2024.
Tian Liang, Zhiwei He, Wenxiang Jiao, Xing Wang, Yan Wang, Rui Wang, Yujiu Yang, Zhaopeng Tu,
and Shuming Shi. Encouraging divergent thinking in large language models through multi-agent
debate. InConference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), 2024.
Chris Lu, Cong Lu, Robert Tjarko Lange, Jakob Foerster, Jeff Clune, and David Ha. The AI Scientist:
Towards fully automated open-ended scientific discovery.arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.06292, 2024.
Pan Lu, Swaroop Mishra, Tony Xia, Liang Qiu, Kai-Wei Chang, Song-Chun Zhu, Oyvind Tafjord, Peter
Clark, and Ashwin Kalyan. Learn to explain: Multimodal reasoning via thought chains for science
question answering. InAdvances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.
M-A-P Team et al. SuperGPQA: Scaling LLM evaluation across 285 graduate disciplines.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2502.14739, 2025.
Amil Merchant, Simon Batzner, Samuel S. Schoenholz, Muratahan Aykol, Gowoon Cheon, and
Ekin Dogus Cubuk. Scaling deep learning for materials discovery.Nature, 2023.
Santiago Miret and NM Anoop Krishnan. Are LLMs ready for real-world materials discovery?arXiv
preprint arXiv:2402.05200, 2024.
Alexander Novikov, Ngân Vû, Marvin Eisenberger, Emilien Dupont, Po-Sen Huang, Adam Zsolt Wagner,
Sergey Shirobokov, Borislav Kozlovskii, Francisco J. R. Ruiz, Abbas Mehrabian, et al. AlphaEvolve:
A coding agent for scientific and algorithmic discovery.arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.13131, 2025.
OpenAI. Hello gpt-4o, 2024. URLhttps://openai.com/index/hello-gpt-4o/.
OpenAI. Introducing openai o3 and o4-mini, 2025. URLhttps://openai.com/index/introdu
cing-o3-and-o4-mini.
OpenAI. Introducing openai o3 and o4-mini, 2025. URLhttps://openai.com/index/introdu
cing-o3-and-o4-mini/.
OpenAI. Introducing gpt-5.4, 2026. URLhttps://openai.com/index/introducing-gpt-5-4.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
instructions with human feedback.Advances in neural information processing systems, 2022.
Chen Qian, Zihao Xie, YiFei Wang, Wei Liu, Kunlun Zhu, Hanchen Xia, Yufan Dang, Zhuoyun Du,
Weize Chen, Cheng Yang, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. Scaling large language model-based
multi-agent collaboration.International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025.
David Rein, Betty Li Hou, Asa Cooper Stickland, Jackson Petty, Richard Yuanzhe Pang, Julien Dirani,
Julian Michael, and Samuel R. Bowman. GPQA: A graduate-level google-proof Q&A benchmark. In
Conference on Language Modeling (COLM), 2024.
14

SciOrch: Learning to Orchestrate Expert LLMs for Solving Frontier Multimodal Scientific Reasoning Tasks
Bernardino Romera-Paredes, Mohammadamin Barekatain, Alexander Novikov, Matej Balog, M. Pawan
Kumar, Emilien Dupont, Francisco J. R. Ruiz, Jordan S. Ellenberg, Pengming Wang, Omar Fawzi,
et al. Mathematical discoveries from program search with large language models.Nature, 2024.
Jianhao Ruan, Zhihao Xu, Yiran Peng, Fashen Ren, Zhaoyang Yu, Xinbing Liang, Jinyu Xiang, Yongru
Chen, Bang Liu, Chenglin Wu, Yuyu Luo, and Jiayi Zhang. AOrchestra: Automating sub-agent
creation for agentic orchestration.arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.03786, 2026.
Michael Schmidt and Hod Lipson. Distilling free-form natural laws from experimental data.Science,
2009.
Yu Shang, Yu Li, Keyu Zhao, Likai Ma, Jiahe Liu, Fengli Xu, and Yong Li. AgentSquare: Automatic
LLM agent search in modular design space.arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.06153, 2024.
Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei Zhang, Mingchuan
Zhang, Y. K. Li, Y. Wu, and Daya Guo. DeepSeekMath: Pushing the limits of mathematical reasoning
in open language models.arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03300, 2024.
Hongjin Su, Shizhe Diao, Ximing Lu, Mingjie Liu, Jiacheng Xu, Xin Dong, Yonggan Fu, Peter Belcak,
Hanrong Ye, Hongxu Yin, et al. ToolOrchestra: Elevating intelligence via efficient model and tool
orchestration.arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.21689, 2025.
Nathan J. Szymanski, Bernardus Rendy, Yuxing Fei, Rishi E. Kumar, Tanjin He, David Milsted,
Matthew J. McDermott, Max Gallant, Ekin Dogus Cubuk, Amil Merchant, et al. An autonomous
laboratory for the accelerated synthesis of inorganic materials.Nature, 2023.
Khanh-Tung Tran, Dung Dao, Minh-Duong Nguyen, Quoc-Viet Pham, Barry O’Sullivan, and Hoang D.
Nguyen. Multi-agent collaboration mechanisms: A survey of LLMs.arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.06322,
2025.
Hanchen Wang, Tianfan Fu, Yuanqi Du, Wenhao Gao, Kexin Huang, Ziming Liu, Payal Chandak,
Shengchao Liu, Peter Van Katwyk, Andreea Deac, et al. Scientific discovery in the age of artificial
intelligence.Nature, 2023a.
Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc Le, Ed Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha Chowdhery,
and Denny Zhou. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language models. In
Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023b.
Zhenhailong Wang, Shaoguang Mao, Wenshan Wu, Tao Ge, Furu Wei, and Heng Ji. Unleashing the
emergent cognitive synergy in large language models: A task-solving agent through multi-persona
self-collaboration. InNorth American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(NAACL), 2024a.
Zirui Wang, Mengzhou Xia, Luxi He, Howard Chen, Yitao Liu, Richard Zhu, Kaiqu Liang, Xindi Wu,
Haotian Liu, Sadhika Malladi, et al. CharXiv: Charting gaps in realistic chart understanding in
multimodal LLMs.Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2024b.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc
Le, and Denny Zhou. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.
Johannes Welbl, Nelson F. Liu, and Matt Gardner. Crowdsourcing multiple choice science questions.
InWorkshop on Noisy User-generated Text (W-NUT) at EMNLP, 2017.
15

SciOrch: Learning to Orchestrate Expert LLMs for Solving Frontier Multimodal Scientific Reasoning Tasks
Fang Wu, Weihao Xuan, Heli Qi, Ximing Lu, Aaron Tu, Li Erran Li, and Yejin Choi. DeepSearch:
Overcome the bottleneck of reinforcement learning with verifiable rewards via monte carlo tree
search.arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.25454, 2025.
Wanghan Xu et al. Probing scientific general intelligence of LLMs with scientist-aligned workflows.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.16969, 2025.
Xiang Yue, Yuansheng Ni, Kai Zhang, Tianyu Zheng, Ruoqi Liu, Ge Zhang, Samuel Stevens, Dongfu
Jiang, Weiming Ren, Yuxuan Sun, et al. MMMU: A massive multi-discipline multimodal under-
standing and reasoning benchmark for expert AGI. InProceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2024.
Xiang Yue, Tianyu Zheng, Yuansheng Ni, Yubo Wang, Kai Zhang, Shengbang Tong, Yuxuan Sun,
Botao Yu, Ge Zhang, Huan Sun, Yu Su, Wenhu Chen, and Graham Neubig. MMMU-Pro: A more
robust multi-discipline multimodal understanding benchmark.Proceedings of the 63rd Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2025a.
Yanwei Yue, Guibin Zhang, Boyang Liu, Guancheng Wan, Kun Wang, Dawei Cheng, and Yiyan Qi.
MasRouter: Learning to route LLMs for multi-agent systems.Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2025b.
Guibin Zhang, Yanwei Yue, Zhixun Li, Sukwon Yun, Guancheng Wan, Kun Wang, Dawei Cheng,
Jeffrey Xu Yu, and Tianlong Chen. Cut the crap: An economical communication pipeline for
LLM-based multi-agent systems.arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.02506, 2024a.
Jiayi Zhang, Jinyu Xiang, Zhaoyang Yu, Fengwei Teng, Xionghui Chen, Jiaqi Chen, Mingchen Zhuge,
Xin Cheng, Sirui Hong, Jinlin Wang, et al. AFlow: Automating agentic workflow generation.arXiv
preprint arXiv:2410.10762, 2024b.
Mingda Zhang, Haoran Luo, Tiesunlong Shen, Qika Lin, Xiaoying Tang, Rui Mao, and Erik Cambria.
FlowSteer: Interactive agentic workflow orchestration via end-to-end reinforcement learning.arXiv
preprint arXiv:2602.01664, 2026a.
Wenchuan Zhang, Jingru Guo, Hengzhe Zhang, Penghao Zhang, Jie Chen, Shuwan Zhang, Zhang
Zhang, Yuhao Yi, and Hong Bu. Patho-AgenticRAG: Towards multimodal agentic retrieval-
augmented generation for pathology VLMs via reinforcement learning. InProceedings of the
AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2026b.
Yuze Zhao, Jintao Huang, Jinghan Hu, Xingjun Wang, Yunlin Mao, Daoze Zhang, Zeyinzi Jiang,
Zhikai Wu, Baole Ai, Ang Wang, Wenmeng Zhou, and Yingda Chen. SWIFT: A scalable lightweight
infrastructure for fine-tuning. InProceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2025.
Yuhao Zhou, Yiheng Wang, Xuming He, Ruoyao Xiao, et al. Scientists’ first exam: Probing cognitive
abilities of MLLM via perception, understanding, and reasoning.arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.10521,
2025.
Mingchen Zhuge, Wenyi Wang, Louis Kirsch, Francesco Faccio, Dmitrii Khizbullin, and Jürgen
Schmidhuber. GPTSwarm: Language agents as optimizable graphs. InInternational Conference on
Machine Learning (ICML), 2024.
16

SciOrch: Learning to Orchestrate Expert LLMs for Solving Frontier Multimodal Scientific Reasoning Tasks
A. The Use of LLMs
We used LLMs exclusively for manuscript refinement. Specifically, we used them to correct typo-
graphical errors, fix grammatical problems, and improve linguistic expression. The authors carefully
reviewed and validated all content generated or refined with LLM assistance. We did not use LLMs for
conceptual development, data collection, code implementation, experimental design, or interpretation
of results.
B. Model Documentation
Orchestrator backbone.SciOrch uses Qwen3-VL-8B-Instruct as its policy backbone. At each decision
step, the policy observes the original multimodal question, the accumulated interaction history, and
the available commercial model pool, then emits a structured action: either delegate a sub-problem
to one commercial model or submit a final answer. During training, MCTS samples candidate
orchestration trajectories using the current Qwen policy, and REINFORCE++ updates the policy from
step-level signals extracted from the resulting search tree. We also evaluate Qwen3-VL-8B-Instruct as
an open-source baseline under vanilla prompting, SFT, and GRPO.
Expert models.SciOrch uses GPT-5.4, Gemini-3-Pro, and Claude-Sonnet-4.5 as its three commercial
expert models. During training and inference, the Qwen policy delegates selected sub-problems to
these models through API calls, and each response is appended to the interaction history before the
next decision step. We also evaluate the same three models as standalone prompted baselines and
run a self-consistency and multi-agent debate on this pool. GPT-4o and Gemini-2.5-Pro are used
for model-complementarity analysis and SFE quality gating, but they are not reported as prompted
standalone baselines in the main result table.
Routing baseline.We use the public P2L-1.5B checkpoint as the routing baseline. P2L receives
the question stem together with OCR-extracted figure text, then selects one model from the same
three-model commercial pool used by SciOrch. This baseline tests whether one-shot text- based
routing can match SciOrch’s multi-step delegation.
C. Dataset Documentation
SGI-Reasoning.SGI-Reasoningistheprimarybenchmarkusedinthispaper. ItisasubsetofSGI-Bench
and contains 291 multimodal scientific reasoning questions across nine disciplines. Each example
requires reasoning over scientific visual content and selecting an answer in a multiple-choice format.
We stratify the dataset by discipline into 145 training questions and 146 held-out test questions. We
do not apply additional quality gating because it is the target evaluation benchmark.
Scientists’ First Exam.SFE is used as an augmentation source. The full dataset contains 830
bilingual visual question-answering items across Astronomy, Chemistry, Earth Science, Life Science,
and Materials Science. We first keep English multiple-choice items, yielding 281 candidate examples.
We then apply multi-model quality gating with GPT-5.4, GPT-4o, Gemini-3-Pro, Gemini-2.5-Pro,
and Claude-Sonnet-4.5, retaining examples that at least one frontier model answers correctly. The
resulting SFE subset contributes 31 training questions and 94 test questions.
17

SciOrch: Learning to Orchestrate Expert LLMs for Solving Frontier Multimodal Scientific Reasoning Tasks
D. Prompt Templates
Orchestrator Prompt
You are the Orchestrator for a multimodal scientific MCQ.
You ROUTE focused sub-questions to specialist sub-models, then submit ONE final option.
Specialists answer; you decide. Do NOT solve it yourself.
Each turn, emit exactly one JSON object (schema at the end):
- delegate_task: one focused sub-question (not the whole problem).
- submit: \boxed{<letter>} (A..J).
{action_line}
Pool:
{model_guidance_text}
Routing:
- VISION_REASONING -> Vision pool. Hard CALC / SCI -> Frontier. Medium -> Strong
general. Easy lookup / 1-step arithmetic -> Lightweight.↩→
- Match by task-pool fit, not by model reputation.
Sub-question rules:
- ONE missing fact per sub-question; do not bundle multiple unknowns.
- Frame the answer so it can be mapped back to the OPTIONS.
- Do not leak your guess or prior conclusions; do not paraphrase or redefine the QUESTION.
- Do not repeat a sub-question already answered.
QUESTION:
{question}
OPTIONS:
{options}
PRIOR DELEGATE STEPS:
{prior_delegate_steps}
Reasoning (in`reasoning`, in order; keep concise):
1. Evidence: what each prior step confirmed and which OPTIONS it supports/eliminates.
2. Counter-check: ONE observation that, if found, would FLIP your current leaning. Checked?
3. Decision: if Submit Gating fails, delegate to close the gap; only then submit.
Submit Gating (ALL must hold):
(a) The decisive fact is supported by at least one delegate step (not only your own reasoning).
(b) If any prior delegate had confidence >= 0.9 on the decisive fact, either an INDEPENDENT
cross-check exists (re-derive from raw values, read a different region, or apply a sanity
bound), OR you justify why none is needed (e.g. direct read of a label/printed value).
↩→
↩→
(c) No unchecked counter-check could flip the answer.
18

SciOrch: Learning to Orchestrate Expert LLMs for Solving Frontier Multimodal Scientific Reasoning Tasks
Hard:
-`model`MUST be a name from the Pool above.
-`task_type`is one of CALCULATION | SCI_REASONING | VISION_REASONING.
- If a computed value is not among OPTIONS, re-examine the QUESTION intent.
- Pick the best-supported option; do not argue options are wrong.
- Only when`action`is submit: in`reasoning`, briefly name the top two letter options you
considered and one sentence on why evidence favors one over the other (audit trail for
the final pick only; never put this in`instruction`).
↩→
↩→
- Keep`reasoning`concise. Output must be exactly one JSON object.
Output JSON only. Exactly one of:
{"action":"delegate_task","reasoning":"...","model":"<model name>","instruction":"...","task⌋
_type":"CALCULATION|SCI_REASONING|VISION_REASONING"}↩→
{"action":"submit","reasoning":"...","final_answer":"\\boxed{<letter>}"}
Expert Prompt
You are a specialized SubAgent for multimodal scientific reasoning.
MainAgent is asking you to resolve one focused uncertainty.
Focused question from MainAgent:
{focused_question}
{task_type_hint}
Rules:
- Answer only the focused question above.
- Do not give the whole-problem final decision.
- Use the original question and images only as context.
- If the focused question requires visual evidence, examine the provided images directly and
cite specific features, values, or regions you observe.↩→
- Keep the answer concise and grounded in the task context.
- Give a local confidence for your answer to the focused question.
- Do not assume MainAgent's current direction is correct; reason independently from the
evidence.↩→
- Use a conservative confidence: low when evidence is partial/conflicting, high only when the
evidence is direct and clear.↩→
-`answer`must directly answer MainAgent's focused question.
-`confidence`must be a number in [0, 1].
- Do not output markdown fences.
Original Question:
{question}
Output JSON only:
{
19

SciOrch: Learning to Orchestrate Expert LLMs for Solving Frontier Multimodal Scientific Reasoning Tasks
"answer": "direct answer to MainAgent's focused question",
"evidence": "brief evidence-grounded explanation",
"confidence": 0.00
}
20