# source_pdf: mechanistic-semantic-conflicts-activation-patching-2607.05587.pdf
# extracted_at_utc: 2026-07-10T01:27:07.783731+00:00
# pages: 12
# title: A Mechanistic Lens on Semantic Conflicts: Using Activation Patching to Understand LLM Behavior
# source_sha256: 2640724c6c8602d43471e7092dfcc2991fd75657bd60eb154167ff6ede0f9692



===== PAGE 1 =====

A Mechanistic Lens on Semantic Conflicts: Using
Activation Patching to Understand LLM Behavior
Youssef Abdelsalam, Norman Peitek, Anna-Maria Maurer, Marvin Wyrich, and Sven Apel
Saarland Informatics Campus, Saarland University
Saarbru¨cken, Germany
Abstract—Large language models (LLMs) are increasingly This renders LLMs distinctive among software-engineering
used in software-engineering tasks processing executable code tools, as they jointly process executable implementations and
and non-executable semantic cues such as comments or identi-
natural-language cues. In fact, LLMs often rely on semantic
fiers. These two sources of information can conflict, leading to
cues in their reasoning [13], [14]. When conflicts arise, it
situations where the semantic cues suggest different program
behavior than the code itself. It remains unclear how such remains unclear which source LLMs prioritize and how this
semantic conflicts affect LLM behavior and which source of affects downstream tasks such as test generation, program
information dominates their outputs. repair, and agentic development. Prior work has documented
We present the first controlled, mechanistic study of LLM
many LLM failures in coding tasks [15], [16], but behavioral
behavior under semantic conflicts. To this end, we construct 45
outputs alone cannot explain how conflicting information is in-
Python snippet triplets that isolate conflicts by varying either
semantic cues or implementation while keeping token-aligned ternally represented or how it influences downstream software-
pairs for causal intervention. We evaluate four open-weight LLMs engineering tasks.
on two tasks—final-output prediction and unit-test generation— We address this gap by studying LLM behavior under
using both behavioral performance measures and residual-stream
semantic conflicts in two tasks: predicting program outputs
activation patching to identify token-layer states that causally
and generating unit tests. We introduce an experimental frame-
contribute to differences in LLM behavior between aligned and
conflicting inputs. work that combines behavioral evaluation with mechanistic
Our results show that semantic conflicts significantly reduce interpretability. Using residual-stream activation patching, an
execution-grounded correctness in both tasks and that all tested intervention-based method commonly used in mechanistic
LLMs frequently follow (misleading) semantic cues. Residual-
interpretability [17], [18], we causally trace where conflict-
stream activation patching reveals a consistent pattern for final-
relevant representations emerge within the model. To this end,
output prediction: The changed cue/code region and a small set
of intermediate tokens carry most of the recoverable causal signal we construct paired inputs in which identical code is presented
before being aggregated near the output readout. For unit-test with either consistent (aligned) or inconsistent (conflicting)
generation, this pattern extends beyond the prompt, showing that semantic cues, allowing us to patch residual states between
conflict-related information is not only recoverable at prompt
these conditions and identify token-layer sites whose internal
sites but also at generated assertion sites before producing
states are sufficient to shift the LLM’s outputs.
expected values. Overall, our findings show that semantic conflicts
affect both program comprehension and downstream tasks, Our dataset consists of 45 minimal, token-matched Python
with the relevant information concentrated in a small number triplets: an aligned baseline and two conflicting variants cre-
of causally active residual-stream states, and demonstrate a ated by modifying either the implementation or a semantic cue.
framework for mechanistically analyzing how LLMs integrate
Across four open-weight autoregressive transformer models,
different sources of code-related information under controlled
we find that semantic conflicts substantially reduce execution-
semantic variations.
Index Terms—Large Language Models, Mechanistic Inter- grounded correctness in both tasks. Models frequently follow
pretability, Semantic Conflicts, Program Comprehension misleading semantic cues, producing incorrect outputs or tests.
Mechanistically, we observe a staged pattern: early layers are
I. INTRODUCTION
sensitive to modified cue/code regions, middle layers to a
Large language models (LLMs) are increasingly used in sparse set of intermediate tokens, and later layers to the final
software-engineering workflows [1], [2], including test gen- input context.
eration [3], [4], program repair [5], [6], and agentic de- To our knowledge, this is among the first applications of
velopment [7], [8]. These workflows expose LLMs to both causal mechanistic interpretability methods in a software-
executable code and non-executable semantic cues, such as engineering context. Beyond characterizing the effects of
comments, identifiers, and other natural-language texts. While semantic conflicts, our framework shows how such methods
these sources typically agree in well-maintained code [9], [10], can localize behaviorally relevant signals within the residual
they often diverge in practice due to outdated documentation, stream, narrowing the search space for future analyses (e.g.,
misleading identifiers, or evolving implementations [10]–[12], path patching [19] or circuit tracing [20]). This opens avenues
resulting in semantic conflicts. Such conflicts are inherently for diagnosing LLM behavior, improving reliability, and de-
ambiguous, as neither source can be assumed authoritative tecting conflicts between cue- and execution-consistent signals
without external validation. before they affect outputs during code-related tasks.
6202
luJ
6
]ES.sc[
1v78550.7062:viXra


===== PAGE 2 =====

implementation-varied aligned (baseline) cue-varied
# Returns whether the input is even # Returns whether the input is even # Returns whether the input is odd
def compute(x): def compute(x): def compute(x):
return x % 2 == 1 return x % 2 == 0 return x % 2 == 0
print(compute(4))� print(compute(4)) print(compute(4))
L1 ... LN L1 ... LN L1 ... LN
T0 T0 T0
... ‘even’ ‘odd’
1 ... ...
Tn-1 Tn-1 Tn-1
execution-consistent cue-consistent test generation: LN
output generation:
def test_compute():
assert compute(4) == True
FALSE assert compute(5) == False L1
assert compute(6) == True�
patch odd->even 0 :
How do semantic conflicts affect LLM behavior during RQ1.2 and RQ2.2: Can we trace the causal contribution of internal represen-
program comprehension (RQ1.1) and test generation (RQ2.1)? tations by applying residual activation patching across layers and tokens?
Fig. 1. Overview of our experimental framework. We construct 45 Python snippet triplets (aligned, implementation-varied, and cue-varied) and provide them
together with either an output prediction task (RQ1) or a unit-test generation task (RQ2) to four LLMs. We then (i) assess how semantic conflicts shift model
behavior relative to execution and cues, and (ii) identify the token-layer sites that causally drive these shifts via residual activation patching.
In summary, we make the following contributions: The MBPP benchmark similarly evaluates synthesis of short
• An experimental framework to study semantic conflicts Python programs from natural-language task descriptions and
between cues and implementations, introducing activation tests [23]. Subsequent work has shown that such test-based
patching for software-engineering research. evaluation depends on the size and quality of the test set, show-
• A behavioral analysis of 45 Python triplets showing that ing that many LLM-generated solutions previously counted as
semantic conflicts significantly reduce correctness in both correct fail under more rigorous testing [24]. In any case, these
output prediction and generated unit tests. benchmarks and extensions establish functional correctness as
• A causal mechanistic analysis identifying token-layer states a central evaluation target for code LLMs, but which is often
that shift outputs between aligned and conflicting inputs. assessed only for the final code output.
• A replication package, including analysis scripts and 45 LLMs are also increasingly applied for test generation.
token-aligned code snippet triplets, to support future re- Recent benchmarks evaluate generated tests using a broad
search [21]. range of criteria, such as validity, coverage, mutation score,
pass rate, and fault-detection ability [3], [4], [25]. ULT is a
Figure 1 summarizes the resulting study design, connecting
benchmark for function-level unit-test generation from real-
the aligned and conflicting snippet variants to the behavioral
world Python functions. It reports accuracy, statement cover-
measurements and residual-stream interventions used through-
out the paper.
age, branch coverage, and mutation score [26]. TESTFORGE
evaluates an agentic test-generation framework using pass@1,
II. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK line coverage, and mutation score on TESTGENEVAL [27].
In this section, we provide the necessary background and Wang et al. argue that coverage alone can be a weak indicator
summarize prior work related to our study. We review three of fault-detection ability and use mutation score as a stricter
areas: (1) LLMs in software engineering, (2) mechanistic evaluation target for LLM-generated tests [28]. Their work
interpretability of LLMs, and (3) semantic conflicts between treats generated tests as software-engineering artifacts and
executable code and non-executable software artifacts. evaluates their practical quality. In our study, test generation
serves a different role: Generated assertions are used as one
A. LLMs in Software Engineering behavioral window into the LLM’s inferred interpretation of a
LLMs for code generation are commonly evaluated through program.
external behavioral criteria, especially execution-based func- Recent work suggests that code-tuned LLMs encode signals
tional correctness. For example, HUMANEVAL introduced about generated-code correctness in their internal representa-
a benchmark of Python programming problems evaluated tions before any external test execution occurs. Approaches
by unit tests and popularized pass@k-style evaluation [22]. such as OPENIA use intermediate representations from code-


===== PAGE 3 =====

specialized LLMs to assess whether generated code is cor- and accumulate information across layers [38]. Residual-
rect [29], while AUTOPROBE refines this idea by dynamically stream interventions are complementary to sparse-feature ap-
selecting informative hidden states and applying them to prop- proaches, which seek to decompose dense activations into
erties such as compilability, functionality, and security [30]. interpretable features using sparse autoencoders [39]. In soft-
Similarly, Ribeiro et al. study LLMs’ internal representation ware engineering, sparse-autoencoder and attribution-graph
of code correctness by contrasting hidden states for correct and approaches have recently been used to analyze correctness-
incorrect code for the same programming tasks, showing that related representations in code LLMs [32], [33]. Our work
the extracted representation can help select higher-quality code builds on these mechanistic tools: We use causal residual-
samples without test execution [31]. Other work moves toward stream patching on controlled code inputs to study how LLMs
more mechanistic diagnostics: Sparse-autoencoder analyses reconcile competing sources of program semantics.
identify activation directions associated with correctness [32],
while CODECIRCUIT traces how information flows through C. Semantic Conflicts in Software Artifacts
the LLM during code generation and uses this analysis to
Software artifacts combine executable code, which deter-
identify which lines of code contribute to correctness-related
mines runtime behavior, with non-executable semantic cues
predictions [33]. Together, these studies show that correctness-
such as comments, docstrings, and identifiers that convey
relevant information is reflected in internal representations and
intent or rationale. Prior work has emphasized the impor-
can be used to analyze, predict, or influence the quality of
tance of comments and natural-language artifacts for program
generated code. Despite this progress, this line of work has
comprehension and maintenance, while also showing that
largely centered on correctness as the target property, while
they can diverge from code—for example, when comments
internal mechanisms for handling other aspects of program
are not updated alongside code changes [40]–[42] or when
comprehension—such as conflicts between multiple sources
linked resources decay over time [43]. These studies motivate
of information—remain comparatively underexplored.
treating executable code and non-executable cues as related
B. Mechanistic Interpretability of Language Models but separable sources of information.
The distinction between executable behavior and natural-
Mechanistic interpretability aims to explain LLM behavior
language intent is also reflected in code-tuned LLM bench-
by analyzing internal components and representations. Causal
marks. HUMANEVAL tasks are specified through natural-
mediation analysis introduced the idea of treating hidden units,
language doc strings and evaluated by tests [22]; MBPP tasks
attention heads, or layers as mediators between input and
are specified by natural-language descriptions and example
output and intervening on them to estimate causal contri-
tests [23], which mirrors ordinary software-engineering prac-
bution [34]. Causal abstraction and interchange-intervention
tice, where natural language and code jointly specify intended
frameworks provide a more general account of how neural
behavior. However, it also means that standard end-to-end
computations can be related to abstract, human-interpretable
benchmarks usually evaluate whether an LLM satisfies the pro-
causal explanations of LLM behavior [35]. In transformer
vided task specification, not how the LLM internally balances
language models, causal tracing and activation patching have
executable evidence against non-executable semantic cues in
become standard tools for localizing behaviorally relevant acti-
case of conflict/inconsistency. This creates an opportunity and
vations. Meng et al. use causal tracing to locate factual associ-
a need at the same time for mechanistic analysis: Semantic
ations in GPT models [36]. Wang et al. use activation patching
conflicts in code provide controlled contrasts for studying how
and path patching to identify an indirect-object-identification
LLMs process different sources of program behavior.
circuit in GPT-2 Small [37]. Conmy et al. systematize this
workflow through automated circuit discovery [20].
D. Positioning of Our Work
Activation patching is particularly relevant to our work, as it
provides a causal method for asking whether a specific internal Our work sits at the intersection of these three research
activation contributes to an externally observable behavioral areas. Unlike prior internal-correctness studies that primarily
difference. Methodological work emphasizes that patching re- compare correct and incorrect generations, we study prompts
sults depend on the choice of source and destination prompts, in which the input itself contains conflicting evidence about
corruption or contrast construction, patching granularity, and behavior. Unlike standard code-generation or test-generation
behavioral metrics: Zhang and Nanda show that activation- evaluations, we do not only ask whether the final artifact is
patching results can vary substantially with metric and method correct, but we ask how information from different parts of
choices [17]. Heimersheim and Nanda emphasize that patching the prompt causally contribute to the LLM’s behavior. We
should be interpreted as evidence of causal contribution under therefore use semantic conflicts in code as the experimental
a specified setup, not as a complete explanation of a models’s subject for mechanistic analysis, and compare two behavioral
algorithm [18]. These cautions are especially important when endpoints: final-output prediction and generated unit-test as-
patching code or other non-canonical natural-language tasks. sertions. This positions our study as a causal analysis of how
The residual stream is a natural target for such interventions LLMs route executable and non-executable information when
because work on transformer circuits conceptualizes it as the interpreting code, providing a more fine-grained view of how
main communication channel through which layers read, write, competing signals are resolved during inference.


===== PAGE 4 =====

III. RESEARCH QUESTIONS A. Independent Variables and Code Snippets
Based on our overarching goal, we start from a setting where Our goal is to identify how LLMs handle conflicts between
we have Python code snippets with aligned and conflicting non-executable semantic cues, such as function names or
versions at our disposal, allowing us to test whether conflicting comments, and executable program behavior. In this con-
semantic cues cause the LLM to deviate from execution- text, we construct systematically varied Python snippets and
grounded behavior. To provide an overview of how the categorize them into aligned and conflicting, depending on
conflicts affect the LLM in standard program-comprehension whether the non-executable semantic cues and the executable
tasks, we pose our first research question: program behavior are consistent with each other. We consider
one independent variable (“cue-implementation alignment”)
RQ How do semantic conflicts affect LLM behavior with 3 levels: For the aligned snippets, the non-executable
1.1
during program comprehension? semantic cues and the executable program behavior imply the
same outcome. For the cue-varied snippets, we introduce a
To answer this question, we create prompts with the snippets small, localized change to a semantic cue that contradicts
and an output prediction task and analyze the output tokens of the executable program’s behavior (e.g., replacing “even” with
the LLM compared to the snippet’s execution behavior. Based “odd”; see Figure 1). For the implementation-varied snippets,
on that knowledge, we aim to next identify token-layer sites we instead introduce a localized code change that alters the
that shift the LLM’s output preference and pose the second program’s behavior to deviate from the intent suggested by the
part of the research question: semantic cue (e.g., replacing “0” with “1”; see Figure 1).
In total, we created 45 Python snippet triplets (i.e., 135 total
RQ Which token-layer sites causally contribute to shift- snippets; similar to Figure 1) consisting of short functions with
1.2
ing LLM outputs between aligned and conflicting inputs? meaningful identifier names and, where necessary, a function-
level comment describing the intended behavior. Each stimulus
For this question, we store the internal representations
pair differs by 1–2 localized changes while ensuring that all
gained through RQ and perform residual activation patching
1.1 regarded LLMs tokenize the changes in the exact same number
per layer and token, where we patch the information from con-
of tokens, so that the post-change tokens remain aligned
flicting code versions into the aligned one and vice versa. We
between prompts. To ensure meaningful contrasts, each pair
execute the LLM with the patched representation and analyze
must incite a cue–implementation conflict for, at least, one
whether the patch changes the model’s output preference.
studied LLM for output generation. We provide details on the
In addition to the output prediction task, we also analyze
snippets and their construction in the replication package [21].
the LLM behavior and internal representations for a standard
downstream task in software engineering: test generation. B. LLMs
Thus, we pose our second research question:
We selected four open-weight autoregressive transformer
LLMs that support residual-stream analysis and can follow
RQ How do semantic conflicts affect LLM behavior
2.1 the task prompts. The selected LLMs are CODELLAMA-
during test generation?
7B-PYTHON [44] and the INSTRUCT variants of QWEN2.5-
To answer this question, we create prompts with the snip-
7B [45], MISTRAL-7B [46], and LLAMA-3.1-8B [47]. This
set includes a code-tuned LLM and general-purpose, code-
pets, ask the LLM to generate pytest style unit tests with
capable LLMs and is available for mechanistic analysis
3 test cases, and execute them to assess their alignment with
semantic cues and implementation.
through TRANSFORMERLENS [48]. QWEN2.5 contains 28
transformer layers, whereas the other LLMs contain 32.
RQ Which token-layer sites causally contribute to dif-
2.2 C. Tasks
ferences in LLM-generated unit tests between aligned and
conflicting inputs? We investigate two complementary programming tasks:
final-output prediction and unit-test generation.
In line with RQ 1.2 , we create assertion-specific prompts in a) Final-Output Prediction (RQ 1 ): The final-output pre-
which each generated test case is provided up to the assertion diction task evaluates the LLM’s direct answer to an es-
value. We then perform residual activation patching per layer tablished program-comprehension question by predicting the
and token and analyze whether the patch changes the model’s output of a given snippet. We execute the LLM with zero
completion at the assertion value. temperature and validate the generated predictions against the
executed runtime output to assess the consistency of the LLM
IV. METHODOLOGY
with the implementation. We measure cue consistency by com-
To answer our research questions, we create a curated set of paring against the predefined behavior suggested by the cue or
Python snippets, prompt the LLM for final-output and unit-test paired aligned variant. Thus, a response can be both-consistent,
generation, and perform residual activation patching to identify cue-consistent, execution-consistent, or neither-consistent. The
token-layer sites which shift the LLM’s output preference. ground truth for correctness is the execution behavior.


===== PAGE 5 =====

b) Unit-Test Generation (RQ ): The unit-test generation snippet and the residual stream activations are cached per patch
2
task measures the behavioral interpretation that the LLM site. A patch site is defined by a transformer layer and an
externalizes as PYTEST-style unit-test assertions. This task aligned patch unit (e.g., even, odd, 0, 1, see Figure 1).
requires the LLM to formulate expected behavior in executable Consecutive changed tokens are treated as one combined patch
test form with three test cases for the function compute. unit to preserve the atomicity of the manipulation.
The generated unit tests are treated as a behavioral probe of Then, we execute patched runs by replacing the residual
the LLM’s inferred interpretation of the snippet. To determine stream activation of a patch site in a destination prompt with
whether an assertion aligns with the semantic cues or the the corresponding activation from the paired source prompt
implementation, we distinguish between the two types of (source → dest). We perform patching starting from the first
conflicts. For cue-varied prompts, we evaluate the conflict- token position where the snippets differ, to ensure that patched
ing generated assertions against a cue-semantics oracle (cue- activations occur at positions that can causally depend on
consistent) and the conflicting implementation (execution- the manipulation. We patch in both directions independently,
consistent). For implementation-varied prompts, we evaluate fixing the conflicting prompt (forward: aligned → conflicting)
the assertions against the conflicting (execution-consistent) and and corrupting the aligned prompt (reverse: conflicting →
the aligned implementation (cue-consistent). If a test passes aligned).
both implementations for a varied prompt, it is both/non- For each patching comparison consisting of snippet pair and
discriminating, as this test does not discriminate between the task, we define a source-associated behavior and a destination-
two interpretations. For aligned prompts, we evaluate the as- associated behavior from the two semantic outputs represented
sertions against the aligned implementation (both-consistent). by the stimulus pair. We interpret a patched activation as
Otherwise, the assertion is labeled as neither. causally contributing to the paired contrast when it shifts the
For RQ , we create one prompt for each gener- LLM’s output preference toward the source reference. This
2.2
ated test case, in which we separate the assertion ex- contrast is defined independently of the LLM’s generated
pression from its generated expected value, so that response label.
assert compute(4) == is part of the prompt and the For RQ , we contrast the two final-output candidates
1.2
value after == is the output contrast. Based on this prompt, associated with a snippet pair. For RQ , patching identifies
2.2
we patch the LLM and analyze how the output preference prompt and generated-prefix states that shift the expected value
between the two expected values changes. of a generated assertion. We use the expected values used
for labeling the assertions in RQ now to contrast between
2.1
D. Statistical Analysis on Behavior (RQ and RQ )
1.1 2.1 aligning and conflicting snippets in a pair. Assertions for which
To assess whether semantic conflicts affect LLM behavior, both candidates are identical are excluded in RQ because
2.2
we use standard paired statistical tests to compare between they do not distinguish the conflict.
aligned and conflicting versions of the snippet triplets. The 1) Evaluation of LLM Patching: In line with prior
paired design controls for differences in snippet complexity. work [17], [37], we compute how much a patched run changes
For the final-output prediction, the outcome is binary (i.e., from original destination behavior to source behavior using
correct or incorrect). Thus, we use exact paired McNe- a recovery score. This score compares the logits of candi-
mar tests, which are specifically designed for paired binary date outputs associated with each prompt compared to the
data [49]. We report the paired risk difference as aligned unpatched baseline logits. A larger recovery score indicates
minus conflicting correctness and measure the effect size that the patched residual state activation has a stronger causal
using Cohen’s g [50]. Because the comparisons are paired influence on the LLM’s output, identifying contributing token-
by snippet, they control for differences in baseline snippet layer sites. To focus on patch sites with a considerable causal
difficulty and isolate the effect of introducing a semantic effect, we exclude all patch sites with a recovery below 0.3.
conflict. We report additional results with thresholds of 0.2 and 0.5 as
For unit-test generation, we evaluate LLM behavior using sensitivity checks in the replication package [21].
the pass rate of the 3 assertions per snippet. Since these rates The denominator of the recovery score is the unpatched
are not binary and may not be normally distributed, we use source–destination margin gap, ∆ = m − m . If this
S D
paired Wilcoxon signed-rank tests [51] and measure the effect denominator is close to zero, normalized recovery can look
using signed rank-biserial effect size r . large even when the raw logit change caused by the patch is
rb
Finally, since our analyses include multiple LLMs and modest. We therefore perform a robustness check that filters
conflicts, we apply a Holm correction to control for family- runs with small denominators by requiring |∆| ≥ τ for
wise error [52], and use the typical α = 0.05 threshold. This τ ∈ {0.05, 0.10, 0.25} logits, with τ = 0.10 as the primary
holds for all statistical analyses, including RQ and RQ . threshold. The exact formulas and edge-case handling are in
1.2 2.2
the replication package [21].
E. Residual Stream Activation Patching (RQ and RQ )
1.2 2.2 Next, we localize the patch sites with the highest causal
We use residual stream activation patching to identify token- impact. One aspect we analyze is how causal contributions
layer sites that causally shift LLM behavior between our paired are distributed across different parts of the input. In addition to
snippets. For each snippet pair, the LLM is run once on each changed region and readout sites, we identify all intermediate


===== PAGE 6 =====

TABLE I Cue-varied Implementation-varied
RQ1.1 PAIRED EXACT MCNEMAR TESTS COMPARING ALIGNED AND CodeLlama 7B 44% 42% 13% 42% 47% 11%
CONFLICTING FINAL-OUTPUT CORRECTNESS. Llama 3.1 8B 64% 18% 18% 44% 38% 18%
Mistral 7B 33% 40% 27% 33% 49% 18%
LLM Conflict Family Correctness Effect Size pHolm Qwen2.5 7B 36% 49% 16% 33% 44% 22%
Aligned Conflicting Diff. g 0 20 40 60 80 100 0 20 40 60 80 100
Cue-varied 44.4% 44.4 0.50 < 0.001 Conflicting prompts (%) Conflicting prompts (%)
CodeLlama 7B 88.9%
Impl-varied 42.2% 46.7 0.46 < 0.001
Cue-varied 64.4% 20.0 0.50 0.004 Execution-consistent Cue-consistent Neither
Llama 3.1 8B 84.4%
Impl-varied 44.4% 40.0 0.41 < 0.001
Mistral 7B C
Im
u
p
e-
l-
v
v
a
a
r
r
ie
ie
d
d
73.3% 3
3
3
3
.
.
3
3
%
%
4
4
0
0
.
.
0
0
0
0
.
.
4
3
5
0
<
0
0
.
.
0
0
0
0
3
1 Fig. 2. RQ1.1 Distribution of response labels on conflicting prompts. Cue-
consistent responses are incorrect under the execution-grounded evaluation
Cue-varied 35.6% 42.2 0.41 < 0.001
Qwen2.5 7B Impl-varied 77.8% 33.3% 44.4 0.46 < 0.001 but indicate sensitivity to the misleading cue.
patch units exerting a substantial causal effect, which we
call carrier tokens. For RQ , we additionally differentiate
2.2
between carrier tokens within the prompt (prompt carriers) and
within the generated test case (response carriers). To identify
the best recovery per such category of patch units, we take
the maximum recovery over layers. We analyze the strength
of recovery over categories of patch units for every model,
conflict type and patch direction using the paired Wilcoxon
signed-rank tests [51] test and describe the signed rank-biserial
effect size r .
rb
Furthermore, we calculate the best recovery layer for every
category of patch units. We take the unit with the largest recov-
ery score and record the layer at which it peaks. To account for
the varying number of transformer layers (Qwen2.5 7B: 28;
other LLMs: 32), we normalize the layer indices to their
relative depth in the interval of [0, 1]. We analyze the best
recovery layer over categories of patch units for every model,
conflict type and patch direction using the paired Wilcoxon
signed-rank tests [51] test and describe the signed rank-biserial
effect size r . rb
V. RESULTS
In this section, we present the results of our behavioral and
causal analyses structured along our two tasks.
A. Effect of Semantic Conflicts on LLM Behavior (RQ )
1.1
Final-output prediction was the first behavioral test of
the constructed semantic conflicts. We compare aligned and
conflicting prompts using execution-grounded correctness. Our
results show that correctness is consistently higher for aligned
prompts than for conflicting prompts across all LLMs, with
an average drop of 39.7 percentage points. When conduct-
ing paired McNemar tests, every LLM–conflict comparison
remains statistically significant after Holm correction (see
Table I), with effect sizes between 0.3 and 0.5.
To characterize the errors induced by the conflicts, we
further divide the incorrect conflicting-prompt responses based
on whether they match the misleading cue to separate conflict-
induced failure (cue-consistent output) from generic task fail-
ure (neither). As shown in Figure 2, the division shows
that many erroneous outputs of the LLMs are cue-consistent
(up to 49%), even frequently surpassing the rate of correct
execution-consistent outputs (above 33%). Thus, the LLMs
]txetnoC[ ]...[ neve
>-
ddo
tluser . fed etupmoc x( :) >secaps
3<
nruter x % >ecaps< 2 == >ecaps< 0 >senilwen
2<
tnirp moc( etup ( 4 )) `` ` tuptuO :
25
20
15
10
5
0
reyaL
1
0.5
0
-0.5
-1
yrevocer
dengis
Fig. 3. RQ1.2 Representative residual-recovery heatmap for Qwen2.5 7B,
cue-varied pair 001, patching the conflicting-cue source into the aligned-cue
destination. The changed cue token recovers in early layers, token 0 exhibits
a later recovery band, and the readout token recovers in the final layers.
exhibit a directed bias under conflict, with many failures
aligning with the incorrect but semantically salient cue.
RQ Conflicting semantic cues reliably reduce final-
1.1
output correctness. The effect is large, statistically signifi-
cant for every LLM–conflict pair, and frequently directed
toward the misleading cue.
These findings establish that the dataset contains effective
conflicts motivating the residual-stream analysis in RQ .
1.2
B. Internal Localization of Semantic-Conflict Information
During Output Prediction (RQ )
1.2
Having established that semantic conflicts affect final-output
behavior, we investigate in RQ where the conflicting infor-
1.2
mation becomes causally available inside the LLM. To illus-
trate the results, we present a representative run for Qwen2.5
7B on cue-varied pair 001 in Figure 3. The execution-grounded
result is True, whereas the conflicting cue implies False. The
strongest recovery score first appears directly at the changed
cue token odd in an early layer. A second region with a high
recovery score appears at the token 0, which carries part of the
relevant parity predicate. A high recovery score finally appears
at the last readout token, where the output is decoded.
This example is representative of the mechanistic pattern
we identified over all patch runs: There is a noticeable
recovery at the changed patch site, at a few intermediate
code tokens and at the last token (i.e., the readout site).
Our intermediate token analysis identified 2 640 carrier tokens
across 720 runs, with a mean of 3.67 and a median of one
carrier token per run. This sparsity indicates that conflict-
relevant residual information is not uniformly available at
all downstream tokens. Instead, it concentrates in a small


===== PAGE 7 =====

1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00 Changed Carrier Readout
).mron(
reyal
tseB
1.25
1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25 Changed Carrier Readout
yrevocer
tseB
TABLE II
RQ2.1 PAIRED WILCOXON TESTS COMPARING ALIGNED AND
CONFLICTING GENERATED-TEST ASSERTION CORRECTNESS.
LLM Conflict Family Assertion Pass Rate Effect Size pHolm
Aligned Conflicting Diff. rrb
Cue-varied 81.5% 49.6% 31.9 0.82 < 0.001
CodeLlama 7B Impl-varied 81.1% 37.1% 43.9 0.89 < 0.001
Cue-varied 89.6% 71.1% 18.5 1.00 < 0.001
Llama 3.1 8B
Impl-varied 89.6% 48.5% 41.1 1.00 < 0.001
Fig. 4. RQ1.2 Site-group comparison at the primary carrier threshold. Changed Mistral 7B Cue-varied 77.8% 50.7% 27.0 0.81 < 0.001
region peaks early, carrier tokens in middle layers, and readout site late; Impl-varied 77.8% 34.1% 43.7 0.91 < 0.001
Cue-varied 83.0% 62.5% 20.5 0.65 0.002
recovery is strongest at changed and readout sites and substantial for carriers. Qwen2.5 7B
Impl-varied 83.0% 52.7% 30.3 0.71 < 0.001
Cue-varied Implementation-varied
number of intermediate tokens before being aggregated at the
CodeLlama 7B 8% 41% 36% 16% 9% 28% 44% 19%
readout site. Analyzing the recovery distribution across layers
Llama 3.1 8B 15% 54% 18% 13% 15% 34% 35% 16%
shows the same staged pattern. Median best recovery occurs Mistral 7B 13% 37% 32% 18% 10% 25% 42% 23%
around layer 2 at changed-region sites, around layers 10–11 at Qwen2.5 7B 9% 53% 29% 9% 10% 42% 31% 18%
carrier tokens, and around layers 23–26 at readout sites (see 0 20 40 60 80 100 0 20 40 60 80 100
Conflicting assertions (%) Conflicting assertions (%)
Figure 4). Thus, carrier tokens peak several layers after the
Both / non-discriminating Execution-consistent Cue-consistent Neither
changed region but well before the late readout stage near
generation. These layer offsets are pairwise significant with Fig. 5. RQ2.1 Assertion labels for conflicting generated unit tests, in which
extremely large effects (p < 0.001, r ≥ 0.958). A both/non-discriminating assertions are runtime-correct assertions and share the
Holm rb
same expected value under both execution semantics and misleading cue.
detailed overview is provided in the replication package [21].
Analyzing the recovery strength shows that carrier tokens
exert a substantial effect (median 0.52), but it is lower than
as shown in Table II. Aligned assertions result in a pass
for the changed-region (median 1.01) and readout site (median rate between 77% to almost 90%. In comparison, the cue-
1.00), as shown in Figure 4. Pairwise tests show that there is varied pass rate is reduced by 18.5 to 31.9 percentage points;
a significant difference between all three categories (p <
Holm this reduction is generally smaller than seen in RQ . In
1.1
0.001), with a large recovery-strength contrast between carrier
contrast, implementation-varied reductions remain similarly
token and both changed-region and readout site (r rb ≥ 0.892, large, ranging from 30.3 to 43.9 percentage points. The effects
r rb ≥ 0.830). The effect size between changed-region and are large to very large (r = 0.65–1.00). The conflicts
rb
readout site is much smaller (median difference < 0.1, r ≥
rb therefore affect not only direct output extraction but also the
0.371). Recovery strength, carrier prevalence, and staging
behavioral specifications encoded in generated tests.
remain similar across both carrier-threshold sensitivity checks
The generated unit tests show that, across both conflicts,
and forward/reverse patching comparisons. Detailed analyses many assertion failures are cue-consistent (18%–42%) rather
are included in the replication package [21]. than arbitrary (9%–23%; see Figure 5). Furthermore, a consid-
erable portion of assertions are both/non-discriminating, which
RQ Residual patching provides a mechanistic account of
1.2
means the selected values fail to expose the underlying conflict
the conflict in RQ and reveals a general causal staging
1.1
(up to 15%). This mirrors the pattern of RQ at the level
pattern for semantic conflicts: The changed cue/code region 1.1
of generated behavioral specifications, and additionally shows
have a high recovery in early layers, sparse carrier tokens
that some generated tests avoid the conflict by choosing non-
at intermediate layers, and the readout site in layers near
diagnostic inputs, which is highly problematic in practice (see
generation. Thus, conflict information is introduced at the
Section VI-A)
edited semantic site, made available at selected intermediate
program tokens, and accumulated at the generation context. RQ Semantic conflicts also reduce the pass rate for
2.1
assertions during unit-test generation. The effect is signif-
C. Effect of Semantic Conflicts on Downstream Tasks (RQ ) icant across all LLM–conflict pairs, and many erroneous
2.1
tests follow the conflicting cue. A separate both/non-
Next, we study the effect of semantic conflicts on gener-
discriminating category shows that some runtime-correct
ating unit tests as a downstream behavioral task common in
generated tests choose inputs that avoid the conflict.
software engineering. This task is more open-ended than final-
output prediction because an LLM can generate different test
D. Localization of Semantic-Conflict Information During
inputs and multiple assertions per snippet. Nevertheless, the
Unit-Test Generation (RQ )
behavioral effect observed in RQ also appears for unit-test 2.2
1.1
generation, with lower assertion pass rate under both conflict In RQ , we investigate how semantic conflicts affect the
2.2
pairs for every LLM. expected assertion-value that the LLM writes into a unit test.
All eight LLM–conflict comparisons show statistically sig- Analyzing the recovery distribution across layers shows
nificant reductions in assertion pass rate after Holm correction a staged pattern that closely parallels final-output prediction


===== PAGE 8 =====

1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00
Changed Prompt Response Readout
carriers carriers
).mron(
reyal
tseB
1.25
1.00
0.75
0.50
Changed Prompt Response Readout
carriers carriers
yrevocer
tseB
A. Synthesis and Interpretation
Our results in RQ show that semantic conflicts expose a
1.1
specific failure mode in which LLMs frequently follow cue-
consistent behavior when implementation and semantic cues
disagree. This decision between cue- and execution-consistent
behavior occurs in both output prediction and unit-test gen-
eration, propagating conflicts into a downstream artifact that
Fig. 6. RQ2.2 Assertion-specific staging and recovery strength of conflict
can later misguide developers, tools, or further LLM actions.
information during unit-test generation at the primary carrier threshold.
Beyond cue-consistency failures, our results in RQ high-
2.1
light another problematic bias: Many non-discriminating unit
while adding a distinct response-generation stage before the tests illustrate how conflicts can persist unnoticed, since these
readout site. Median best recovery occurs around layer 2 at tests avoid the semantic disagreement. Unlike a failing test, a
changed-prompt sites, around layers 8–10 at prompt carriers, passing but non-discriminating test may not alert the developer
around layers 11–13 at response carriers, and at the final that the implementation diverges from the intended behavior,
layer (27 or 31) at the expected-value readout (Figure 6). leaving the underlying disagreement hidden and unresolved.
All adjacent layer offsets are significant with large to very These observations have implications for downstream
large rank-biserial effects: prompt carriers follow changed- software-engineering tasks that rely on LLMs inferring de-
prompt sites by a median normalized-depth offset of 0.222 veloper intent correctly, including code review, automated
(p < 0.001, r = 0.952), response carriers follow prompt repair, refactoring, test generation, and agentic workflows.
Holm rb
carriers by 0.111 (p < 0.001, r = 0.676), and the Following the wrong source of information in a conflict can
Holm rb
readout follows response carriers by 0.419 (p < 0.001, produce outputs that are plausible and useful-looking while
Holm
r = 0.982). preserving or introducing the wrong behavior. Our findings
rb
Carrier prevalence remains sparse, with prompt carriers therefore provide empirical evidence from a new angle for
averaging 2.35 tokens or 5.3% of eligible patch units, and the usual maintainability argument for accurate documentation
response carriers averaging 1.64 tokens or 4.6% of eligible and naming [11]. Bad comments, stale documentation, and
patch units. The share between prompt and response carriers misleading identifiers are not merely unhelpful context for
does not differ significantly (p = 0.475), indicating that an LLM, but they can actively steer generated code, reviews,
Holm
the smaller response count mainly reflects fewer available repairs, or tests toward an incorrect interpretation. Semantic-
positions. cue sensitivity is therefore both useful and hazardous. LLMs
Recovery strength differs in line with the recovery-strength need such cues to infer intent, but AI-assisted workflows need
pattern observed in RQ : Median best recovery is high for checks that identify when those cues conflict with execution.
1.2
both the changed region and expected-value readout (1.01
and 1.00), but lower for both carrier sites (0.54). Pairwise B. Mechanistic Interpretability and Causal Analysis
statistical tests confirm very large recovery-strength contrasts For RQ and RQ , we turn the behavioral effects of LLMs
1.2 2.2
between carrier and changed-prompt respective expected-value into causal study objects using a mechanistic analysis through
readout sites (p Holm < 0.001, r rb ≤ −0.919, respective interventions. Although mechanistic interpretability methods
p Holm < 0.001, r rb ≥ 0.876). In contrast, prompt and response are well established for natural-language behavior [36], [37],
carriers do not differ significantly (p Holm = 0.913), as well as they have rarely been applied in software engineering [31],
changed region and readout site (p Holm = 0.355). Forward [33]. Our experimental framework demonstrates how these
and reverse patching preserve the same four-part staging, methods can be adapted to problems in software engineering
with small direction-specific offsets reported in the replication with the example of semantic conflicts in program code.
package [21].
Our study demonstrates how residual-stream activation
patching serves as a targeted discovery mechanism that re-
RQ Unit-test generation exhibits a four-stage localization
2.2
vealed a staged localization pattern across the prompt and
pattern similar to what we observed for output prediction
generation context, which gives the behavioral result a more
in RQ . Conflicting information is first recoverable at
1.2
actionable form: It identified at which layers and tokens the
the changed prompt, then at sparse prompt carriers, then
conflict-relevant information is recoverable and where follow-
at generated assertion-prefix carriers, and finally at the
up methods should look for the components that carry cue or
expected-value readout. Recovery strength is highest at the
execution information, thereby reducing the otherwise large
changed prompt and readout, while prompt and response
search space to a targeted set of candidate token-layer sites.
carriers show lower but comparable recovery.
This way, our framework enables more targeted follow-
up analyses. For example, path patching can trace whether
VI. DISCUSSION AND IMPLICATIONS information from the changed region reaches intermediate
tokens and readout sites through specific components, while
In this section, we discuss our results and their implications. component-level ablations can test whether those components


===== PAGE 9 =====

are necessary for cue- or execution-following behavior. Vali- during generation. In the semantic-conflict setting, a devel-
dated sites can further support cross-model comparisons and opment environment could then flag reliance on misleading
monitoring of conflict-related internal features during code cues or detect generated tests that do not exercise the relevant
tasks. behavioral distinction. More generally, similar diagnostics
could be designed for specific code phenomena, such as side
C. Implications for Research
effects, API choices, exception paths, or state updates. When
For researchers, the main implication is methodological. a generation depends on one of these fragile decisions, a tool
Activation patching provides a way to connect behavioral could trigger targeted execution checks, request additional test
evaluation with causal evidence about where task-relevant cases, or ask the LLM to justify the behavior it assumed.
information is recoverable inside the LLM. Our results show The same analyses are also relevant for LLM providers.
that this approach can be applied to software-engineering Controlled contrasts can become regression suites for code-
problems when token-aligned inputs, well-defined behavioral capable LLMs, especially when new versions are trained or
contrasts, and localized changes in the prompt are available. fine-tuned. They can reveal whether an LLM over-relies on
Semantic conflicts should therefore be understood as a misleading semantic cues, whether execution-grounded behav-
testbed rather than an endpoint. Similar paired designs could ior improves after fine-tuning, and whether improvements on
study localized code phenomena, such as control-flow condi- conflicting cases preserve behavior on aligned cases. More
tions, loop bounds, non-local dependencies, API choices, or broadly, mechanistic signals could inform data curation, fine-
exception handling behavior. The same methodology could tuning objectives, and deployment audits for LLMs used in
also be applied to other software-engineering tasks and arti- software-engineering workflows.
facts (design, requirements, etc.) when the task can be framed
around a controlled, scoreable contrast. In each case, the VII. THREATS TO VALIDITY
contrast must define the output alternatives that are being In this section, we discuss potential threats to validity and
compared so that behavioral changes and activation-patching how we mitigated them.
effects can be measured.
A. Construct Validity
More broadly, software-engineering research can benefit
from adapting mechanistic interpretability methods, which are A key threat concerns how we interpret LLM outputs
well established in natural-language settings, ranging from when semantic cues and execution behavior diverge. For
activation probes and sparse autoencoders to activation patch- output prediction, execution behavior provides a reference
ing, path patching, targeted ablations, and circuit-discovery for correctness, but binary correctness labels would obscure
techniques [17], [18], [20]. Our experimental framework il- whether an LLM was influenced by semantic cues. For unit-
lustrates the feasibility of this transfer and highlights the non- test generation, no independent specification defines the in-
trivial methodological requirements. Code tasks often require tended behavior, which requires the LLM to infer it from
preserving syntactic validity, aligning interventions with mean- the code, including comments, identifiers, and implementa-
ingful program locations, and defining behavioral contrasts tion details. We mitigate this threat by distinguishing cue-
that are both controlled and semantically interpretable. The consistent, execution-consistent, both-consistent, and neither-
snippet-based paired design used here addresses these require- consistent outputs rather than forcing all outputs into a binary
ments for semantic conflicts, and illustrates how software- correctness judgment.
engineering datasets may need to be structured to support A second threat concerns the granularity of our mechanistic
causal mechanistic analysis. Broadening such task formula- analysis. We use residual-stream activation patching, which
tions would make it possible to study how LLMs represent identifies token-layer sites that causally affect the LLM’s
program structure, execution behavior, developer intent, and preference for specific outputs. This analysis localizes where
task-specific decisions with the same causal precision that is these effects arise in the residual stream, but it abstracts
increasingly common in natural-language analyses. away from the specific attention heads, multi-layer-perceptron
components, and multi-layer paths that produce or propagate
D. Implications for Practice
them. Future work shall investigate the feasibility of using path
For practitioners, the immediate implication is that stale patching [19] or circuit-discovery methods [20] to analyze the
comments, misleading names, and inconsistent docstrings rep- responsible components and propagation paths in more detail.
resent risks in AI-assisted development. Beyond affecting
B. Internal Validity
human understanding, they can steer LLM-generated code,
reviews, repairs, and tests. Cleaning up documentation and We designed the snippets to isolate conflicts between ex-
naming therefore lowers the chance that an LLM infers the ecutable behavior and non-executable semantic cues. Each
wrong intent from otherwise plausible context. snippet belongs to a paired triplet with localized, token-
The broader opportunity is to turn this kind of analysis into aligned changes, which controls for length, structure, and
generation-time tooling if reliable components or circuits can baseline difficulty. We preferred reducing such confounds over
be identified. Residual-stream patching by itself is a discovery maximizing snippet diversity, so the results primarily support
method, but validated circuit-level signals could be monitored controlled semantic-conflict claims.


===== PAGE 10 =====

During dataset construction, each snippet pair had to show respect to executable behavior and cue-suggested behavior.
the intended behavioral contrast for at least one studied LLM. Our results may not generalize to other downstream tasks
The same LLM had to answer the aligned variant correctly such as summarization, bug detection, refactoring, or agentic
and produce a cue-consistent error on the conflicting variant, tool use, where outputs are often longer, evaluation is less
ensuring a meaningful patching contrast. We do not require objective, and interaction, tools, or execution feedback may
this behavior from every LLM on every pair and instead test change how models rely on semantic cues.
whether the resulting patterns are stable across LLMs. Finally, we analyze four open-weight LLMs around 7–8 B
For activation patching, we use predefined execution- and parameters because residual-stream patching requires mecha-
cue-consistent candidates, so neither-consistent generations are nistic access and feasible compute. This avoids relying on a
still analyzed when they define a valid contrast. To avoid single model, but larger, closed, tool-augmented, or differently
inflated normalized recovery when source and destination fine-tuned LLMs may behave differently. Future work shall
margins are nearly identical, we require a minimum margin test whether the effects transfer across model scales, model
gap of 0.1 logits and report robustness checks with alternative families, and different training data or fine-tuning choices.
margin thresholds in the replication package [21]. We also
patch in both directions, so the reported localization patterns VIII. CONCLUSION
do not rely on a single patching direction.
For generation, we use deterministic decoding (temp = 0) In this paper, we presented an experimental framework
to remove sampling variance and improve reproducibility [53]. that enabled us to investigate LLM behavior on semantic
For unit-test generation, we ask for three assertions to give the conflicts, where semantic cues suggest program behavior that
model repeated opportunities to express its inferred behavior differs from the code. To this end, we performed a controlled,
for assertion-specific patching. Since the model chooses the mechanistic study with 45 Python code-snippet triplets across
inputs, aligned and conflicting prompts may yield different four LLMs to analyze the impact of semantic conflicts on LLM
assertions. We therefore score each assertion against its gen- behavior for final-output prediction and unit-test generation.
erated expected value, and exclude non-contrastive assertions Furthermore, we causally located conflict-related information
from patching when both interpretations give the same value. within the LLM representation using residual-stream activation
patching. Our results show that semantic conflicts bias LLM
C. External Validity behavior toward following semantic cues, resulting in incorrect
Our study provides controlled evidence that semantic con- output predictions and generated unit tests that either encode
flicts can affect LLM behavior and internal representations. the wrong behavior or avoid the conflict altogether. Using
However, the exact error rates, effect sizes, and localization activation patching, we identified a multi-stage localization
patterns may differ in broader software-engineering settings. pattern for semantic conflicts across output prediction and
We study 45 Python snippet triplets with clear, localized unit-test generation tasks. Conflict information is recoverable
conflicts. This makes execution- and cue-consistent outcomes at the changed cue/code region in early layers, at sparse
unambiguous and keeps execution labels, token alignment, and intermediate carrier tokens in both the prompt and generated
residual patching feasible. This design does not cover larger assertion prefix, and finally at the readout site in late layers
files, repositories, dependencies, complex APIs, side effects, or near generation.
conflicts spread across multiple functions. Such settings often These findings demonstrate how our experimental frame-
lack clean contrastive pairs and token alignments, so our causal work allows us to not only observe LLM output behavior but
patching design may not transfer directly. also localize information that shifts LLM outputs. In particular,
Real conflicts may also be subtler than our constructed the results highlight that under semantic conflicts, LLMs may
examples, such as outdated documentation for edge cases, internalize a specific interpretation of the code and carry it into
identifiers that suggest only part of the behavior, comments downstream tasks, leading to incorrect output predictions and
that omit side effects, or multiple semantic cues that disagree generated unit tests that encode the wrong behavior or fail to
with each other. We therefore interpret the results as evidence exercise the conflict. This has substantial implications for the
that semantic conflicts can affect LLMs, not that all conflict reliability of AI-assisted development, where such behavior
types have the same magnitude or localization. can make semantic conflicts harder to notice and diagnose.
Another threat concerns our choice of tasks. We use the More broadly, a major contribution of our mechanistic
commonly used output prediction for verifying understanding experimental framework is that it can be used to study further
of program behavior [54]. Our setting provides a controlled software engineering phenomena beyond semantic conflicts.
way to measure whether an LLM follows execution behavior Our setup paves the way for future approaches that detect
or semantic cues. This setup enables precise and systematic conflict-relevant internal states before generation. Future work
analysis, but it may not reflect how semantic conflicts affect shall build up on our setup and findings by adopting more
more complex software-engineering tasks. To increase practi- targeted mechanistic methods, such as identifying circuits
cal relevance, we study unit-test generation as a downstream responsible for propagating conflict information. This provides
task. This task requires the LLM to express its interpretation a starting point for approaches to detect, explain, and mitigate
of the intended behavior and can be evaluated objectively with errors in AI-assisted workflows.


===== PAGE 11 =====

DATA AVAILABILITY [18] S. Heimersheim and N. Nanda, “How to Use and Interpret Activation
Patching,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.15255, 2024.
Following open science principles [55], we openly disclose
[19] N. Goldowsky-Dill, C. MacLeod, L. Sato, and A. Arora, “Localizing
all snippet triplets, their construction details, raw data, and Model Behavior with Path Patching,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.05969,
additional results (e.g., of our sensitivity checks) [21]. 2023.
[20] A. Conmy, A. Mavor-Parker, A. Lynch, S. Heimersheim, and A. Garriga-
ACKNOWLEDGMENT Alonso, “Towards Automated Circuit Discovery for Mechanistic In-
terpretability,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
This work has been supported by the European Union as vol. 36, pp. 16 318–16 352, 2023.
part of ERC Advanced Grant “Brains On Code” (101052182). [21] Y. Abdelsalam, N. Peitek, A.-M. Maurer, M. Wyrich, and S. Apel,
“Replication Package - Mechanistic Lens and Semantic Conflicts,”
REFERENCES Jun. 2026. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/brains-on-code/
mechanistic-interpretability-semantic-conflicts
[1] X. Hou, Y. Zhao, Y. Liu, Z. Yang, K. Wang, L. Li et al., “Large Language [22] M. Chen, J. Tworek, H. Jun, Q. Yuan, H. P. d. O. Pinto, J. Kaplan et al.,
Models for Software Engineering: A Systematic Literature Review,” “Evaluating Large Language Models Trained on Code,” arXiv preprint
Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology (TOSEM), arXiv:2107.03374, 2021.
vol. 33, no. 8, pp. 1–79, 2024. [23] J. Austin, A. Odena, M. Nye, M. Bosma, H. Michalewski, D. Dohan
[2] Q. Zhang, C. Fang, Y. Xie, Y. Zhang, S. Yu, W. Sun et al., “A Survey et al., “Program Synthesis with Large Language Models,” arXiv preprint
on Large Language Models for Software Engineering,” Science China arXiv:2108.07732, 2021.
Information Sciences, vol. 69, no. 4, p. 141102, 2026. [24] J. Liu, C. S. Xia, Y. Wang, and L. Zhang, “Is Your Code Generated
[3] J. Wang, Y. Huang, C. Chen, Z. Liu, S. Wang, and Q. Wang, “Software by ChatGPT Really Correct? Rigorous Evaluation of Large Language
Testing with Large Language Models: Survey, Landscape, and Vision,” Models for Code Generation,” in Advances in Neural Information
Transactions on Software Engineering (TSE), vol. 50, no. 4, pp. 911– Processing Systems (NeurIPS), vol. 36, 2023, pp. 21 558–21 572.
936, 2024. [25] W. Wang, C. Yang, Z. Wang, Y. Huang, Z. Chu, D. Song et al., “TestE-
[4] H.-F. Chang and M. Shokrolah Shirazi, “A Systematic Approach for val: Benchmarking Large Language Models for Test Case Generation,”
Assessing Large Language Models’ Test Case Generation Capability,” in Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: NAACL
Software, vol. 4, no. 1, p. 5, 2025. 2025, L. Chiruzzo, A. Ritter, and L. Wang, Eds. Association for
[5] Z. Fan, X. Gao, M. Mirchev, A. Roychoudhury, and S. H. Tan, Computational Linguistics, Apr. 2025, pp. 3547–3562.
“Automated Repair of Programs from Large Language Models,” in Proc. [26] D. Huang, J. Zhang, M. Harman, Q. Zhang, M. Du, and S.-K.
International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE). IEEE, 2023, Ng, “Benchmarking LLMs for Unit Test Generation from Real-World
pp. 1469–1481. Functions,” Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology
[6] X. Yin, C. Ni, S. Wang, Z. Li, L. Zeng, and X. Yang, “ThinkRepair: Self- (TOSEM), Mar. 2026.
Directed Automated Program Repair,” in Proc. International Symposium [27] K. Jain and C. Le Goues, “TestForge: Feedback-Driven, Agentic Test
on Software Testing and Analysis (ISSTA), 2024, pp. 1274–1286. Suite Generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.14713, 2025.
[7] J. He, C. Treude, and D. Lo, “LLM-Based Multi-Agent Systems for
[28] G. Wang, Q. Xu, L. Briand, and K. Liu, “Towards More Effective
Software Engineering: Literature Review, Vision, and the Road Ahead,” Fault Detection in LLM-Based Unit Test Generation,” arXiv preprint
Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology (TOSEM),
arXiv:2506.02954, 2025.
vol. 34, no. 5, May 2025.
[29] T.-D. Bui, T. T. Vu, T.-T. Nguyen, S. Nguyen, and H. D. Vo, “Correctness
[8] J. Liu, K. Wang, Y. Chen, X. Peng, Z. Chen, L. Zhang, and Y. Lou,
Assessment of Code Generated by Large Language Models Using
“Large Language Model-Based Agents for Software Engineering: A Sur-
Internal Representations,” Journal of Systems and Software, p. 112570,
vey,” Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology (TOSEM),
2025.
2026.
[30] T. T. Vu, T.-D. Bui, T.-T. Nguyen, S. Nguyen, and H. D. Vo, “Model-
[9] D. L. Parnas, “Precise Documentation: The Key to Better Software,” in
Agnostic Quality Assessment for LLM-Generated Code via Dynamic
The Future of Software Engineering. Springer, 2010, pp. 125–148.
Internal Representation Selection,” Journal of Systems and Software, p.
[10] Y. Huang, Y. Chen, X. Chen, and X. Zhou, “Are Your Comments Out-
112852, 2026.
dated? Toward Automatically Detecting Code-Comment Consistency,”
[31] F. Ribeiro, C. Spiess, P. Devanbu, and S. Nadi, “On LLMs’ Internal Rep-
Journal of Software: Evolution and Process, vol. 37, no. 1, p. e2718,
resentation of Code Correctness,” in Proc. of International Conference
2025.
on Software Engineering (ICSE), 2026.
[11] E. Aghajani, C. Nagy, M. Linares-Va´squez, L. Moreno, G. Bavota,
[32] K. Tahimic and C. Cheng, “Mechanistic Interpretability of Code
M. Lanza et al., “Software Documentation: The Practitioners’ Perspec-
Correctness in LLMs via Sparse Autoencoders,” arXiv preprint
tive,” in Proc. International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE),
arXiv:2510.02917, 2025.
2020, pp. 590–601.
[12] N. Stulova, A. Blasi, A. Gorla, and O. Nierstrasz, “Towards Detecting [33] Y. He, Z. Zhao, Z. Kaiyu, B. Dai, J. Fu, and Y. Yang, “CodeCircuit:
Inconsistent Comments in Java Source Code Automatically,” in Interna- Toward Inferring LLM-Generated Code Correctness via Attribution
tional Working Conference on Source Code Analysis and Manipulation Graphs,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.07080, 2026.
(SCAM). IEEE, 2020, pp. 65–69. [34] J. Vig, S. Gehrmann, Y. Belinkov, S. Qian, D. Nevo, S. Sakenis
[13] S. Gao, C. Gao, C. Wang, J. Sun, D. Lo, and Y. Yu, “Two Sides of et al., “Investigating Gender Bias in Language Models Using Causal
the Same Coin: Exploiting the Impact of Identifiers in Neural Code Mediation Analysis,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing
Comprehension,” in International Conference on Software Engineering Systems (NeurIPS), vol. 33. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020, pp. 9583–
(ICSE). IEEE, 2023, pp. 1933–1945. 9595.
[14] C. C. Le, M. V. Pham, C. D. Van, H. N. Phan, H. N. Phan, and T. N. [35] A. Geiger, D. Ibeling, A. Zur, M. Chaudhary, S. Chauhan, J. Huang
Nguyen, “When Names Disappear: Revealing What LLMs Actually et al., “Causal Abstraction: A Theoretical Foundation for Mechanistic
Understand About Code,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.03178, 2025. Interpretability,” Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 26, no. 83,
[15] F. Tambon, A. Moradi-Dakhel, A. Nikanjam, F. Khomh, M. Desmarais, pp. 1–64, 2025.
and G. Antoniol, “Bugs in Large Language Models Generated Code: [36] K. Meng, D. Bau, A. Andonian, and Y. Belinkov, “Locating and Editing
An Empirical Study,” Empirical Software Engineering, vol. 30, no. 3, Factual Associations in GPT,” in Advances in Neural Information
p. 65, 2025. Processing Systems (NeurIPS), vol. 35. Curran Associates, Inc., 2022,
[16] S. Dou, H. Jia, S. Wu, H. Zheng, M. Wu, Y. Tao, M. Zhang et al., “What pp. 17 359–17 372.
Is Wrong with Your Code Generated by Large Language Models? An [37] K. Wang, A. Variengien, A. Conmy, B. Shlegeris, and J. Steinhardt, “In-
Extensive Study,” Science China Information Sciences, vol. 69, no. 1, terpretability in the Wild: A Circuit for Indirect Object Identification in
p. 112107, 2026. GPT-2 Small,” in International Conference on Learning Representations
[17] F. Zhang and N. Nanda, “Towards Best Practices of Activation Patching (ICLR), 2023.
in Language Models: Metrics and Methods,” in International Conference [38] N. Elhage, N. Nanda, C. Olsson, T. Henighan, N. Joseph,
on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2024, pp. 1651–1678. B. Mann et al., “A Mathematical Framework for Transformer


===== PAGE 12 =====

Circuits,” Transformer Circuits Thread, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://transformer-circuits.pub/2021/framework/index.html
[39] L. Gao, T. D. la Tour, H. Tillman, G. Goh, R. Troll, A. Radford
et al., “Scaling and Evaluating Sparse Autoencoders,” in International
Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2025, pp. 26 721–
26 754.
[40] A. Mastropaolo, E. Aghajani, L. Pascarella, and G. Bavota, “An Empir-
ical Study on Code Comment Completion,” in International Conference
on Software Maintenance and Evolution (ICSME). IEEE, 2021, pp.
159–170.
[41] T. Steiner and R. Zhang, “Code Comment Inconsistency Detection with
BERT and Longformer,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.14444, 2022.
[42] Y. Abdelsalam, N. Peitek, A. Bergum, and S. Apel, “The Effect
of Comments on Program Comprehension: An Eye-tracking Study,”
Empirical Software Engineering, vol. 31, no. 4, p. 94, Mar 2026.
[43] H. Hata, C. Treude, R. G. Kula, and T. Ishio, “9.6 Million Links
in Source Code Comments: Purpose, Evolution, and Decay,” in Proc.
International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE). IEEE, 2019,
pp. 1211–1221.
[44] B. Rozie`re, J. Gehring, F. Gloeckle, S. Sootla, I. Gat, X. E. Tan
et al., “Code Llama: Open Foundation Models for Code,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2308.12950, 2024.
[45] A. Yang, B. Yang, B. Hui, B. Zheng, B. Yu, C. Zhou et al., “Qwen2
Technical Report,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.10671, 2024.
[46] A. Q. Jiang, A. Sablayrolles, A. Mensch, C. Bamford, D. S. Chaplot,
D. de las Casas et al., “Mistral 7b,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06825,
2023.
[47] A. Grattafiori, A. Dubey, A. Jauhri, A. Pandey, A. Kadian, A. Al-
Dahle, A. Letman et al., “The Llama 3 Herd of Models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2407.21783, 2024.
[48] N. Nanda and J. Bloom, “TransformerLens,” https://github.com/
TransformerLensOrg/TransformerLens, 2022.
[49] Q. McNemar, “Note on the Sampling Error of the Difference Between
Correlated Proportions or Percentages,” Psychometrika, vol. 12, no. 2,
pp. 153–157, 1947.
[50] J. Cohen, Statistical Power Analysis for the Behavioral Sciences.
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1977.
[51] F. Wilcoxon, “Individual Comparisons by Ranking Methods,” Biometrics
Bulletin, vol. 1, no. 6, pp. 80–83, 1945.
[52] S. Holm, “A Simple Sequentially Rejective Multiple Test Procedure,”
Scandinavian Journal of Statistics, pp. 65–70, 1979.
[53] S. Ouyang, J. Zhang, M. Harman, and M. Wang, “An Empirical Study
of the Non-Determinism of ChatGPT in Code Generation,” Transactions
on Software Engineering and Methodology (TOSEM), vol. 34, no. 2, pp.
1–28, 2025.
[54] M. Wyrich, J. Bogner, and S. Wagner, “40 Years of Designing Code
Comprehension Experiments: A Systematic Mapping Study,” ACM
Comput. Surv., vol. 56, no. 4, Nov. 2023.
[55] D. Mendez, D. Graziotin, S. Wagner, and H. Seibold, “Open Science in
Software Engineering,” in Contemporary Empirical Methods in Software
Engineering. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2020, pp. 477–
501.